# Adaptive reward representations integrate expected uncertainty signals in orbitofrontal cortex

DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.adv9590

## Abstract

Incorporating expected uncertainty into reward evaluation is critical for adaptive learning and behavior. The orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) represents reward attributes, such as delay and magnitude, alongside expected uncertainties about upcoming rewards, serving its established role in both value- and risk-based behaviors. However, the cellular basis of how reward and uncertainty interact remains unclear. To investigate, we trained rats on a task where odor cues predicted sucrose rewards with varying uncertainties in delay or magnitude. Single-unit recordings revealed that many OFC neurons encoded expected uncertainties related to reward delay or magnitude. Population-level analysis showed distinct neural codes for delay and magnitude uncertainties, separate from those for reward delay and magnitude. Signals for each reward attribute and associated uncertainty converged onto the same neurons, reducing the sensitivity of delay and magnitude encoding as uncertainty increased. These findings suggest a cellular-level computation in OFC neurons, whereby uncertainty signals are integrated into attribute-specific reward representations, potentially supporting flexible learning and risk control.

## INTRODUCTION

Reinforcement learning, in both animals and humans, relies on the perceived outcome as a feedback signal to update predictions and action policies. The subjective value or usefulness of a particular outcome is not constant; it could change on the basis of our prior knowledge or subjective belief about the likelihood of its occurrence, termed expected uncertainty or risk. For instance, suppose that our online orders are usually delivered on time, in a case of low expected uncertainty, we may feel surprised by occasional early or late deliveries. Conversely, in an investment environment with high expected uncertainty in outcomes, investors might be insensitive to immediate gains or losses and instead focus on long-term profits. How does our brain orchestrate this adaptive outcome evaluation under various kinds of expected uncertainties?

Research has identified the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) as critical in signaling various attributes of a reward outcome, such as its delay and magnitude, in humans (,), nonhuman primates, and rodents. The OFC is also essential for risk-based decisions and shows activity correlated with expected uncertainty in reward magnitude. The coexistence of signals for both reward attributes and their expected uncertainties within the same brain structure raises an important question: Do these signals interact within the same neurons to support adaptive reward representations that incorporate expected uncertainty ? According to the economic value hypothesis, one of the leading theories about OFC functions, neural activity related to expected uncertainties may be integrated—at least, to some extent, in some neurons—into a unified value dimension shared with other reward attributes. If this integration occurs, it should be detectable at the level of individual neurons or neural populations. However, this idea has not been fully tested, and several key questions remain open: How do neurons encode the expected uncertainty associated with various specific reward attributes, such as the reward delay and magnitude? Do these signals share common neural codes at the single-neuron or population level? And how are neural responses to the reward delay and magnitude modulated by their associated expected uncertainties?

To address these questions, we trained rats on an odor-reward association task where each odor cue predicted a sucrose solution reward with a specific expected uncertainty in either reward delay or magnitude. By recording OFC neuronal activity, we found partially shared neurons but distinct population neural codes for the expected uncertainties regarding reward delay and magnitude. These population codes for expected uncertainties were also dissociable from those for the perceived reward delay and magnitude per se. Thus, these results were contradictory to the predictions made by the economic value hypothesis. However, neural signals for reward attributes and their associated expected uncertainties converged and interacted within the same neurons in the OFC, resulting in diminished sensitivity of representations of perceived delay and magnitude of a reward under higher expected uncertainties, showing a cellular level of adaptive reward representations integrating uncertainty signals in the OFC.

In summary, we demonstrated that individual OFC neurons can integrate expected uncertainty signals into adaptive reward outcome representations in an attribute-specific manner. These reward outcome representations may thus be flexibly adjusted to reflect the usefulness of feedback signals, potentially helping subjects regulate risk-taking behavior in uncertain and dynamic environments (, –). These findings may also provide a neural coding framework for understanding OFC dysfunctions observed in individuals with gambling and substance use disorders.

## RESULTS

### Rats learn a task involving expected uncertainty in reward delay or magnitude

Eight rats were trained to perform a sequence of actions in each trial to obtain a sucrose solution reward, guided by nine predictive odor cues (odors 1 to 9; Fig. 1A). Each odor cue predicted the waiting delays and magnitudes of the reward with a particular level of expected uncertainty (Fig. 1B). The task design aimed to investigate neural representations of reward delay and magnitude, their associated expected uncertainties, and how these expected uncertainties influenced the delay and magnitude representations.

Specifically, after initiating each trial by nose-poking into the odor port, the rats sampled one randomly selected odor from nine options, moved to a nearby fluid well, and waited for the delivery of a drop of sucrose solution reward (Fig. 1A). Reward delay was defined as the time from entering the fluid well until the sucrose reward was delivered, while reward magnitude referred to the volume of fluid delivered. Each odor cue predicted either the reward delay or magnitude with a specific degree of expected uncertainty—meaning that the same odor cue was associated with two equally probable delays or magnitudes (Fig. 1B and table S1). We used SD (σ) to quantify the expected uncertainty linked to the two possible reward delays or magnitudes (σdelay or σmagnitude), such that a larger σ indicated greater variability. In particular, odors 1 to 3 led to rewards of the same reward magnitude (110 μl) and average reward delay (3 s) but with varying delay uncertainties (σdelay = 2, 1, and 0.2 s). Odors 4 to 6 predicted rewards of the same reward delay (3 s) and average reward magnitude (110 μl) but with different magnitude uncertainties (σmagnitude = 80, 40, and 8 μl). In contrast, odors 7 to 9 predicted the same reward delay (3 s) but three distinct magnitudes (300, 150, and 30 μl) without any uncertainty (σ = 0 μl). Thus, this task design allowed us to dissociate expected uncertainties about the reward delay and magnitude from the means of these reward attributes.

After extensive training, rats reliably performed the task during unit recording sessions, responding at the fluid well following odor sampling. Their behavioral performance, quantified by the percentage of committed trials and reaction time, aligned well with the predicted average reward delays and magnitudes (Fig. 1C). Specifically, rats responded consistently to odor cues predicting the same average reward delay (Fig. 1C, left) or average reward magnitude (Fig. 1C, middle) and distinctly to cues associated with different reward magnitudes (Fig. 1C, right), despite trial-by-trial behavioral fluctuations within sessions (fig. S1). In total, we recorded activity from 4605 neurons in the lateral OFC as the rats performed the task (Fig. 1, D and E; fig. S2; and table S2).

### Reward delay- and magnitude-specific expected uncertainty signals

During the task, most recorded OFC neurons significantly changed their firing activity throughout the trial compared to the intertrial interval (ITI) (~96% of neurons were recruited at least once across trial epochs, *P < 0.01, rank sum test; figs. S3 and S4). We examined whether these neurons encoded expected uncertainties before reward delivery by analyzing their activities in response to trials with different levels of expected uncertainty regarding either reward delay or magnitude. To minimize potential confounds from neuronal encoding of odor identities, we focused on neuronal activity 0 to 550 ms after fluid well entry, a period during which our previous study in a similar odor-guided task showed that OFC neurons exhibit minimal odor selectivity.

At the time of the fluid well entry, there were neurons showing activity correlations with expected uncertainties regarding reward delay (σdelay; Fig. 2A) or magnitude (σmagnitude; Fig. 2B) and with the expected reward magnitude in the absence of uncertainty (expected magnitude, σ = 0 μl; Fig. 2C). To quantify the selectivity of individual OFC neurons in encoding expected uncertainties, we fitted a generalized linear model (GLM) to the neuronal firing rates of each neuron. Comparing GLM regressions with Gaussian and Poisson distributions revealed that the Poisson GLM outperformed the Gaussian GLM in explaining neural activity for most neurons (fig. S5). In addition, we found that using the SD or variance as regressors to measure uncertainty levels produced highly similar results (fig. S6). Therefore, for the remainder of our regression analyses, we used the SD (σdelay or σmagnitude) as a regressor to indicate different uncertainty levels and applied Poisson GLM to neural data. Similarly, to investigate neuronal selectivity for the expected reward magnitude, we used the expected reward magnitude (σ = 0 μl) as a regressor in Poisson GLM regression analyses. The resultant t value associated with each regressor in the model was used to quantify how strongly each regressor modulates a neuron’s firing activity or, in other words, the encoding strength of expected uncertainty or expected reward magnitude by each neuron. These regression analyses identified many neurons encoding two types of expected uncertainties and the expected magnitude without expected uncertainty (σdelay, 19%; σmagnitude, 15%; expected magnitude, 32%; P < 0.01; Fig. 2, D to I).

Motivated by the economic value hypothesis, which posits that some OFC neurons encode values of expected outcomes on a common scale, we investigated whether neural codes for the two types of expected uncertainties were correlated and whether these codes were related to the neuronal encoding of expected magnitude without uncertainty. First, our regression analysis on individual neurons revealed that some neurons encoded both types of expected uncertainties (12%, denominator being neurons selective to σdelay or σmagnitude; Fig. 2D). However, at the population level, neural activities related to these two uncertainties were largely dissociable, as indicated by the low correlation between t values associated with the σdelay and σmagnitude regressors (r = 0.01, Pearson correlation, n = 4605 neurons; P = 0.92, one-sample t test, n = 8 rats; Fig. 2G). Second, we examined whether the neuronal encoding of each type of expected uncertainty correlated with that of expected magnitude without uncertainty (Fig. 2, E, F, H, and I). While some neurons encoded both expected uncertainties and expected magnitude (17%, denominator being neurons selective to σdelay or expected magnitude; 13%, denominator being neurons selective to σmagnitude or expected magnitude; Fig. 2, E and F), population-level analysis showed that the t values for each expected uncertainty and expected magnitude were barely correlated (r = 0.08 and −0.09, Pearson correlation, n = 4605 neurons; P = 0.015 and 0.012, one-sample t test, n = 8 rats; Fig. 2, H and I). Therefore, despite some shared neurons encoding both types of expected uncertainties and expected magnitude, the neural encoding of expected uncertainty was largely attribute specific and cannot be reduced to a single dimension shared with the expected reward magnitude or value representation.

### Attribute-specific expected uncertainty signals after reward delivery

Not only were the expected uncertainty signals evident before the reward delivery, but they were also present during reward consumption (Fig. 3, A to C), when both the delay and magnitude uncertainties had been resolved, which is consistent with one previous electrophysiological study in monkeys. Comparing t values from regression analyses for each type of expected uncertainty before and after the reward delivery revealed that while neural codes for the expected uncertainty were present both before and after the reward (17%, denominator being neurons selective to σdelay before or after reward delivery; 12%, denominator being neurons selective to σmagnitude before or after reward delivery), they changed significantly, indicating a dynamic neural code (r = 0.10 and 0.08, Pearson correlation, n = 4605 neurons; P = 0.13 and 0.017, one-sample t test, n = 8 rats; fig. S7). In contrast, many neurons encoded the expected magnitude both before and after the reward (26%, denominator being neurons selective to expected magnitude before or after reward delivery), with their neural codes remaining highly correlated, suggesting a relatively stable neural code for expected magnitude (r = 0.27, Pearson correlation, n = 4605 neurons; P = 4.3 × 10−4, one-sample t test, n = 8 rats; fig. S7).

To determine whether the dissociable representations of expected uncertainties and reward magnitude persisted during reward consumption, we applied the same regression and t value correlation analyses used at the time of the well entry (Fig. 2). The findings remained consistent (selective neurons: σdelay, 31%; σmagnitude, 23%; expected magnitude, 34%; Fig. 3, D to I): although many neurons showed selectivity to both σdelay and σmagnitude (19%, denominator being neurons selective to σdelay or σmagnitude; Fig. 3D), the population-level neural codes were only weakly correlated (r = 0.12, Pearson correlation, n = 4605 neurons; P = 0.09, one-sample t test, n = 8 rats; Fig. 3G). Similarly, while subsets of neurons exhibited concurrent selectivity to the delay uncertainty and expected magnitude (24%, denominator being neurons selective to σdelay or expected magnitude; Fig. 3E), their population-level neural codes were uncorrelated (r = −0.03, Pearson correlation, n = 4605 neurons; P = 0.89, one-sample t test, n = 8 rats; Fig. 3H). Overlapping neurons were also found to encode both the magnitude uncertainty and expected magnitude (21%, denominator being neurons selective to σmagnitude or expected magnitude; Fig. 3F), the t value correlations for these two variables were low (r = −0.10, Pearson correlation, n = 4605 neurons; P = 0.58, one-sample t test, n = 8 rats; Fig. 3I), suggesting that, at the time of reward, the neural coding for magnitude uncertainty was also distinct from the that for expected magnitude.

To further assess whether the dissociable neural codes for expected uncertainties and expected reward magnitude were influenced by behavioral fluctuations or training experience—both within and across sessions—we conducted two control analyses on neuronal activity during both the pre- and postreward periods. First, within each session, we included reaction time (fig. S8) or trial number (fig. S9) within each session as an additional regressor into the GLM models. While both regressors increased the explained deviance for many neurons, they did not alter the overall and overlapping proportions of neurons selective for expected uncertainties and expected reward magnitude nor the population-level t value correlations between these variables. This outcome is somewhat expected, given that the trial types were randomly intermixed rather than presented in blocks within each session. Second, we repeated the GLM analyses separately for earlier (11 to 17 sessions per rat) and later (11 to 17 sessions per rat) recording sessions (fig. S10). This comparison revealed no significant differences between early and late sessions. Therefore, these control analyses indicate that, at least following extensive training, neither fluctuations in behavioral performance, trial progression, nor accumulated training experience account for the observed dissociable neural representations of expected uncertainties and expected reward magnitude.

Together, these findings challenge the economic value hypothesis, which posits that the OFC neurons encode different reward attributes and their expected uncertainties along a common value scale. Instead, the results reveal that the OFC largely maintains dissociable representations for each aspect of reward information.

### Dissociable neural codes for perceived reward delay and magnitude

At the time of reward, the expected uncertainties were resolved as the rats perceived actual reward delays and magnitudes, which allowed us to investigate how neurons in the OFC represented these perceived reward delays and magnitudes, including those associated with expected uncertainties and reward magnitude without expected uncertainty (Fig. 4). We found many neurons exhibited selectivity for either the perceived reward delay or magnitude. For example, one neuron showed significant activity modulation in response to the reward delay but not magnitude (Fig. 4A). Conversely, another neuron’s activity was significantly correlated with the reward magnitude but not delay (Fig. 4B). The dataset also included neurons that exhibited multiple types of selectivity (fig. S11).

To formally test how individual neurons simultaneously encoded multiple reward attributes (delay with uncertainty, magnitude with uncertainty, and magnitude without uncertainty), we conducted GLM regression analyses on each neuron. Many neurons contained information about both reward attributes (delay with uncertainty, 37%; magnitude with uncertainty, 28%; magnitude without uncertainty, 34%; Fig. 4C). However, at the neural population level, we observed largely uncorrelated representations of the reward delay and magnitude with expected uncertainties (Fig. 4, D to G). Specifically, GLM analyses revealed low correlations between t values for the reward delay and magnitude (r = 0.05, Pearson correlation, n = 4605 neurons, Fig. 4D; P = 0.89, one-sample t test, n = 8 rats, Fig. 4G), as well as between t values for the reward delay and magnitude without uncertainty (r = 0.09, Pearson correlation, n = 4605 neurons, Fig. 4E; P = 0.58, one-sample t test, n = 8 rats, Fig. 4G). There was a moderate correlation between t values for the reward magnitude with expected uncertainty and magnitude without uncertainty (r = 0.43, Pearson correlation, n = 4605 neurons, Fig. 4F; P = 3.0 × 10−4, one-sample t test, n = 8 rats, Fig. 4G), suggesting a common scale for simple reward magnitude representation. Since we did not observe sufficient evidence for integrated value coding across different attributes of perceived reward, particularly the reward delay and magnitude with uncertainty, these findings support the notion that, while some neurons encode multiple reward attributes, the OFC maintains largely separate representations for different types of reward-related information at the neural population level.

### Diminished delay and magnitude representations under expected uncertainty

Since the signals about expected uncertainty and reward outcomes (i.e. perceived delays and magnitudes) were present in the OFC at the time of reward delivery, we leveraged this convergence to investigate how these variables interact within individual OFC neurons. To test for significant interaction effects (expected uncertainty × delay or magnitude) on neuronal firing rates, we constructed a GLM model with three regressors: expected uncertainty, reward attribute (delay or magnitude), and an interaction term (Fig. 5A). For both delay and magnitude, the inclusion of the interaction term increased the percentages of explained deviance across recorded neurons compared to models without the interaction term (fig. S12, A and B), which suggests that the interaction between expected uncertainty and reward attributes substantially contributed to neuronal firing in the OFC. Neurons showing an interaction effect (delay × σdelay, 20%; magnitude × σmagnitude, 11%) overlapped with those selective to expected uncertainty and reward attributes (delay or magnitude; Fig. 5A), indicating that the neural encoding of expected uncertainty may modulate how neurons encode perceived rewards.

Following these findings, we proposed three possible interaction models (Fig. 5B): (i) The linear model assumes no modulation of neuronal encoding of reward attributes by expected uncertainty, resulting in a linear mapping between reward attributes and neural firing activity; (ii) the sigmoid function model suggests that expected uncertainty decreases the sensitivity of neurons encoding reward attributes, leading to decreased slopes in regression analyses of neuronal firing rates as expected uncertainty increases; (iii) the logit function model proposes that expected uncertainty increases the sensitivity of neurons encoding reward attributes, resulting in increased slopes in regression analyses as expected uncertainty rises. These models predict different patterns of slopes from regressions on neuronal firing rates with one reward attribute as the regressor under varying levels of expected uncertainty: uniform slopes for the linear model, decreased slopes for the sigmoid function model, and increased slopes for the logit function model.

To investigate how expected uncertainty affected the neuronal encoding of the reward delay, we performed regressions on the firing rates of each neuron using trials associated with specific levels of expected uncertainty for reward delay. One example neuron demonstrated that higher expected uncertainty significantly decreased the absolute slope of the regression (Fig. 5C), indicating lower sensitivity in representing reward delays. Confirming this observation at the neural population level, we conducted the same analysis using neurons selective to paired reward delays (1 s versus 5 s, 32%; 2 s versus 4 s, 22%; 2.8 s versus 3.2 s, 11%; Fig. 5, D and E, and fig. S15) and all recorded neurons (fig. S12G), both of which showed reduced absolute slopes under higher expected uncertainty. Similarly, the expected uncertainty regarding reward magnitude also had a negative modulatory effect on the neural encoding of reward magnitude. Single-unit examples (Fig. 5F) and averaged absolute slopes across magnitude-selective neurons (30 μl versus 190 μl, 24%; 70 μl versus 150 μl, 16%; 102 μl versus 118 μl, 8%; Fig. 5, G and H, and fig. S16) and all recorded neurons (fig. S12J) revealed that higher expected uncertainty reduced the sensitivity of neural representations for reward magnitudes. These results align with the predictions of the second model, where expected uncertainty diminished the sensitivity of neural representations for both the delay and magnitude of a reward.

To ensure that these results were not confounded by potential neural activity drift due to satiety over the course of a session, we conducted two control analyses. First, we repeated the regression analyses separately for early versus late trials within each session (fig. S13). Second, we incorporated cumulative reward as an additional regressor in the GLM to examine neural encoding reward delay or magnitude under each level of expected uncertainty (fig. S14). Both analyses yielded results highly consistent with our main findings (Fig. 5), suggesting that the diminished coding sensitivity to reward delay or magnitude under higher expected uncertainty is not attributable to satiety-related changes.

Our findings are consistent with the proposal of range adaptation in explaining the brain’s adaptive reward representations (, –), suggesting that OFC neurons adaptively map their full firing rate range to the minimal and maximum values of possible options within the current context. Our results indicate that OFC neurons adjusted their firing activity limits to each possible outcome set signaled by a particular odor context. Specifically, an outcome set with a larger variation (higher expected uncertainty) and another outcome set with a smaller variation (lower expected uncertainty) shared the same range of firing activity. Consequently, the sensitivity of neural encoding the reward attribute is lower for the outcome set with a higher variation. This extended version of range adaptation provides a plausible explanation for the diminished representation of reward outcome under higher expected uncertainty.

### Adaptive reward coding cannot be explained by lower sensitivity to increased delays or magnitudes

One alternative explanation for the observed reduced neural sensitivity for reward delays and magnitudes with increased expected uncertainty is that the sensitivity of neurons encoding reward attributes simply decreases with longer delays or larger magnitudes. To test this idea, we conducted model comparisons.

We observed that the average absolute slope from neural activity regressions was lower for longer delays compared to shorter delays (fig. S17A), with similar results for reward magnitudes (fig. S17D). However, the critical distinction lies in the predictions made by two models regarding the relative slopes for adjacent delays or magnitudes. Model 1 (decreased coding sensitivity due to longer delays or larger magnitudes; Fig. 6A) predicted monotonically decreasing slopes along adjacent pairs of delays or magnitudes, while model 2 (decreased coding sensitivity due to increased expected uncertainty; Fig. 6B) predicted the highest slope in the middle, with decreased slopes at both ends.

The actual data confirmed model 2’s predictions of selective neurons for both reward delays and magnitudes (Fig. 6, C and D), as well as all recorded neurons (fig. S17). Specifically, the highest slopes were found in the middle range of delays and magnitudes, with decreased slopes at the extremes. Therefore, the data are better explained by decreased coding sensitivity due to increased expected uncertainty rather than simply increased delays or magnitudes alone.

## DISCUSSION

In this study, we trained rats on a task where they learned to predict both the possible delays and magnitudes of an upcoming sucrose solution reward using olfactory cues. Unit recordings from the OFC revealed that neural activity distinctly encoded the expected uncertainties associated with reward delay and magnitude, separate from the encoding of the expected reward magnitude (i.e. expected reward value). The population activity within the OFC also separately encoded the perceived reward delay and magnitude. Critically, the sensitivity of these representations was down-regulated by their respective expected uncertainties. These results indicate that the OFC not only differentiates between various aspects or attributes of a reward but also independently adjusts its sensitivity to each attribute according to its specific expected uncertainty.

### Neural correlates of expected uncertainty

Research on neural correlates of uncertainty distinguishes between different types including perceptual and expected uncertainties (, –). Perceptual uncertainty, often studied in perceptual decision-making tasks, arises from ambiguous bottom-up sensory cues, such as the incoherence of moving dots or mixed sensory inputs. Expected uncertainty, a learned top-down signal requires integrating past cue-outcome history to form a representation of outcome distribution following each particular cue. Recent studies have shown that rodents can use this outcome distribution information to guide behavior (, –), but how expected uncertainties are represented and used in their brain has been less clear. Our data provide compelling evidence for the single-unit level representation of expected uncertainty and its associated statistical parameter—the SD or variance. Building on previous studies with nonhuman primates (,), which have demonstrated representations of expected uncertainty in reward magnitude, our study extends these findings by identifying neural correlates of expected uncertainty in reward delay as well. We demonstrated that these representations down-regulated the sensitivity of reward representations, potentially supporting adaptive behaviors in rats, although further causal validation is needed.

### Separable encoding of reward attributes and their expected uncertainties

According to the economic value hypothesis, while some OFC neurons may encode individual reward attributes, others are expected to integrate these attributes into a common value signal. If this integration were substantial, then we would expect to find high correlations between the neural representations of various reward attributes and their expected uncertainties. However, in this study, we did not observe reliable correlations among these reward-related attributes or their expected uncertainties, which is inconsistent with the economic value hypothesis.

In contrast, aligning with prior studies suggesting that OFC uses distinct codes for various types of information (, –), we observed dissociable firing activities among OFC neurons in response to expected uncertainties regarding reward delay or magnitude, as well as to the perceived reward delay or magnitude. While some neurons encoded both types of expected uncertainties, their responses were largely distinct at the population level, suggesting independent processing of expected uncertainties related to each attribute. Similarly, population representations of expected uncertainty and expected magnitude were largely uncorrelated. Although certain neurons responded to both perceived delay and magnitude, their population-level activities also remained dissociable. Together, these findings challenge the hypothesis that OFC neurons compress multiple reward attributes into a single scalar value transmitted to downstream regions for decision-making. Instead, our results support the view that the OFC maintains separate representations of reward attributes—an idea consistent with a recent study showing that, in a choice task involving multiple reward attributes (i.e. sweetness and probability of a juice reward), monkeys compared options within each attribute and their OFC activity reflected the value of attended attribute rather than an integrated value signal.

However, it is important to consider whether the orthogonal representations of reward attributes and their uncertainties observed in this study are intrinsic to how OFC neurons encode information or if they are flexibly adjusted on the basis of the behavioral relevance within a task. In our study, integrating reward delay and magnitude was not mandatory for successful trial completion, which may contribute to the separable neural codes for these attributes. In contrast, there are tasks where reward and risk information must be combined to predict future outcomes, resulting in more integrated neural correlates. These differences may reflect the flexibility of OFC neurons in adapting their coding strategies based on task demands. Future research should explore the conditions under which the OFC integrates versus segregates reward information to better understand its role in facilitating flexible learning and decision-making.

One limitation of the current task design is the absence of different odor cues predicting varying reward delays with zero variance, which would have enabled a direct assessment of the neural representation of expected reward delays without uncertainty. The current design choice was intentional, as one of the primary goals of the study was to examine whether neural representations of expected uncertainties (σdelay and σmagnitude) are related to value representations—an aim more effectively addressed by manipulating reward magnitudes rather than delays. While our current results adequately address this central question, future work incorporating task conditions with multiple reward delays without variance could enable a more direct comparison between neural codes for predicted delays and those for expected uncertainty about delays (i.e. expected delay versus σdelay).

### Diminished sensitivity of reward coding under expected uncertainty

Our study demonstrated that the sensitivity of OFC neurons to encode reward attributes was diminished under higher expected uncertainty, consistent with previous evidence highlighting the OFC’s critical role in regulating risk-attitude behaviors—how individuals adaptively balance reward acquisition against potential risk. Notably, for example, lesions to the medial OFC have been shown to increase risk-taking in rats, leading them to prefer a risky lever offering a large but unlikely reward over a safe lever delivering a smaller, more probable reward. The diminished neural sensitivity under higher expected uncertainty may help explain why intact OFC function reduces responsiveness to immediate reward gains and losses when outcomes are unreliable. This modulation likely enables animals to resist potentially suboptimal high-reward options in favor of strategies that promote long-term benefits. In this way, an intact OFC may support a balanced evaluation of reward and risk, promoting behavioral stability in the pursuit of sustained gains over time. Together, our findings suggest that under high expected uncertainty, the OFC may down-regulate the influence of immediate rewards on decision-making, thereby supporting adaptive, flexible strategies in uncertain environments.

### Possible mechanism for reduced reward-coding sensitivity

We propose that the reduced sensitivity of neurons encoding reward delay and magnitude under higher expected uncertainty may reflect an adaptive process similar to range adaptation, previously observed in the monkey OFC during economic choice tasks (, –). Range adaptation posits that neurons adaptively adjust their firing rates relative to the full range of possible outcomes, leading to reduced sensitivity as outcome variability increases. While this phenomenon is typically observed in tasks requiring prolonged exposure to a stable context, our findings suggest that similar adaptation can occur even in rapidly changing, randomly intermixed trials. This flexibility may arise because each odor cue defines a distinct outcome context, enabling OFC neurons to adjust their firing independently for each predictive cue. Thus, our results suggest that OFC neurons dynamically modulate their outcome-coding sensitivity based on outcome variability, potentially supporting rapid and efficient decision-making under expected uncertainty.

### Implications for flexible and adaptive decision-making

Overall, these findings demonstrate that OFC neurons encode different reward attributes and their associated expected uncertainties in a largely independent manner, challenging the notion that these neurons compress multiple reward dimensions into a single scalar value for decision-making. These orthogonal representations may provide a flexible framework for integrating and prioritizing specific reward features depending on context. Furthermore, the observation that OFC neurons adjust their sensitivity to reward attributes based on expected uncertainty suggest a potential neural mechanism by which individuals adapt their behavior according to environmental stability. This dynamic modulation may help optimize long-term outcomes and manage risk—processes that are often impaired in individuals with gambling or substance use disorders.

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

### Subjects

The study used both male (n = 6; body weight, 400 to 600 g) and female (n = 2; body weight, 200 to 300 g) Long-Evans rats obtained from Charles River Laboratories, experimentally naïve at the beginning of behavioral training. The animals were housed at the Laboratory Animal Resource Center within the Chinese Institute for Brain Research (CIBR) in Beijing. They were provided food ad libitum and maintained on a 12-hour light-dark cycle in individual ventilation cages with a temperature range of 22° to 25°C within the cages and 20° to 23°C in the facility. The humidity was kept between 40 and 60%. Water was withheld from the rats the day before any testing day. They received free access to water for about 10 min each day in their home cages after testing. If there was no testing the following day, then they were given free access to water. All procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at CIBR under the animal protocol (AP# CIBR-IACUC-037). Animal behavioral and electrophysiological experiments were conducted at CIBR, Beijing.

### Behavioral task

During behavioral training, rats were placed in multiple identical aluminum chambers (~45 cm on each side), each equipped with an odor port and a fluid well. Solenoid valves controlled the release of odors and fluid rewards, while infrared beam sensors tracked the rats’ behavioral responses. These components were connected to an Arduino Mega2560 microcontroller running a custom C++ script to manage task progression. The Arduino communicated via a USB port with a computer running a custom MATLAB (2021a, MathWorks, Natick, MA) application, which sent task parameters at the start of each session and received behavioral data during the ITI. In addition, the Arduino transmitted behavioral data to the Plexon electrophysiological recording system for further analysis.

The start of each trial was signaled by the illumination of paired house lights above the odor panel. Rats were required to nose-poke for 500 ms at the odor port within 5 s after light onset to smell one of nine odors. Following a 500-ms odor presentation, the rat had a 2-s window to respond at the fluid port, which would result in the delivery of a sucrose solution (5%, w/v) after a delay. If the rat did not respond within the 2-s window after leaving the odor port or within 5 s after light onset, then the house lights were extinguished, signaling the end of the trial and the start of the ITI that lasted 4 s following correct trials and 8 s following incorrect or incomplete trials.

The training procedure consisted of three phases: shaping, partial training, and full training. Initially, rats were introduced to the task during the shaping phase (within four sessions), where they learned to nose-poke at the odor port without odors and received water at the fluid port within a 30-s response window. This phase continued until the rats completed 100 trials. Following the shaping phase, the partial training phase began, wherein only one set of three odors was presented to the rats in each session and the response time window was set to 2 s. The reward outcome was a drop of sucrose solution. The first odor set (~17 sessions), consisting of odors 7 to 9, predicted different reward magnitudes (300, 150, and 30 μl) without introducing expected uncertainties. Once the rats steadily achieved a response rate above 90%, they progressed to training with a second set of odors (~39 sessions), odors 1 to 3, which each predicted two equally probable reward delays (1 s versus 5 s, 2 s versus 4 s, and 2.8 s versus 3.2 s). Last, the third set included odors 4 to 6 (~36 sessions), each predicting two equally probable reward magnitudes (30 μl versus 190 μl, 70 μl versus 150 μl, and 102 μl versus 118 μl). Each partial training session comprised 450 trials, equally divided among the three odor trial types, with 150 trials per trial type. During the final full training phase (~32 sessions), the rats were presented with all nine odor trial types. Each session included 405 trials, evenly distributed across the 15 outcome trial types, with 27 trials for each outcome type. All trial types were randomly intermixed within each session, with a unique trial sequence each day for each rat. This training procedure ensured that the rats progressively learned these associations involving variable reward delays and magnitudes.

### Surgical procedures

The trained rats were implanted with nickel-chromium wires (25 μm in diameter; A-M Systems, WA) targeting both hemispheres of the lateral OFC at coordinates anteroposterior 3 mm and mediolateral ±3.2 mm. Each hemisphere received a bundle of 16 wires housed within a thin 304 stainless steel cannula [27-gauge, 0.016-inch (0.41-mm) outer diameter, 0.01-inch (0.25-mm) inner diameter; McMaster-Carr). The wire bundles were cut to extend 1.5 to 2 mm beyond the cannula using fine surgical scissors (16144-13, Fine Science Tools, Foster City, CA). The cannulas were secured to a movable shuttle on a custom-made, three dimensionally printed electrode microdrive, allowing precise adjustment of wire depth. Initially, the tips of the wires were positioned 4.0 mm ventral from the brain surface. Following surgery, rats were administered ceftiofur sodium (5 mg/kg, subcutaneously) and meloxicam (1 mg/kg, subcutaneously) daily, for 1 week, to prevent infection and alleviate pain and inflammation.

### Histology

Upon completion of the behavioral training and recording experiments, the rats were euthanized according to established protocols. The rats were perfused with saline, followed by 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in phosphate-buffered saline (pH 7.4) to fix the brain tissue. To determine the final locations of the electrodes, a small constant current (100 μA) was passed through the wires using a stimulus isolator (A365, World Precision Instruments). Subsequently, the brain tissue was carefully extracted and postfixed in 4% PFA for at least 6 hours at room temperature (25°C) to ensure thorough fixation. The tissue was then dehydrated in a 30% sucrose solution until it sank, indicating adequate dehydration. Following this, the brain tissue was embedded and frozen before being sectioned coronally at 50 μm in thickness using a cryostat microtome (Leica CM3050 S). The sections were mounted on slides with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole mounting medium. Last, images of the brain slices were captured using a slide scanner (Olympus VS120).

### Multichannel in vivo electrophysiology

Electrophysiological signals and behavioral event timestamps were simultaneously recorded using the Plexon OmniPlex System (Plexon, Dallas, TX). This system collected wide-band signals via implanted electrodes, which were then amplified and digitized at a rate of 40 kHz by the Digital Headstage Processor. Spike-band frequency signals within the range of 250 to 8000 Hz were isolated and saved using the PlexControl software. Before each recording session, a common median reference was applied to each electrode bundle to eliminate common noise or artifacts. A threshold for detecting spiking activity was manually set for each channel to capture unsorted spikes. Offline sorting was subsequently performed to isolate single units by removing nonspike signals, using principal components analysis and a built-in template matching algorithm in Offline Sorter (Plexon, Dallas, TX). The sorted data files were converted into NeuroExplorer (Nex Technologies, Colorado Springs, CO) format and imported into MATLAB (2021a, MathWorks, Natick, MA) for further analysis. Following each session, the electrodes were advanced ventrally by ~40 or 80 μm to sample a different neural population in the next session. Throughout these experiments, we identified 4605 single units from eight rats across 242 sessions. The sample sizes (number of rats and neurons) were not determined by statistical methods but were comparable to those reported in similar studies within the field.

### Behavioral analysis

To evaluate the behavioral performance during the recording period, we quantified the percentage of committed trials (“% committed trials”) and reaction time. % Committed trials was defined as the proportion of trials in which rats responded at the fluid well and consumed the sucrose solution reward. Reaction time was the interval between odor port exit and fluid well entry.

### Perievent spiking counts

We synchronized and recorded task events for each trial alongside neural signals. For neural analyses, each trial was segmented into eight task events: “ITI (pre),” “light,” “poke,” “odor,” “unpoke,” “choice,” “outcome,” and “ITI (post).” In trials where the rat did not respond, the end of the 2-s response window was designated as the choice event. The ITI (pre) event was defined as 0.7 s before the onset of the house light, and the ITI (post) was the time point 0.7 s after the house lights were extinguished. Each isolated single unit’s spike train was aligned to the onset of each task event, with a preevent window of 200 ms and a postevent window of 550 ms. Spike counts were calculated within 50-ms bins, resulting in perievent time histograms (−0.2 s to 0.55 s; bin = 0.05 s; 15 time points). These spike counts were used directly for further analyses but were smoothed with a Gaussian kernel (σ = 50 ms) for visualization.

### GLM regression

To investigate how task variables modulated the firing activity of each neuron, we used GLMs with an assumed Poisson distribution using MATLAB’s fitglm function. These models were fitted to each OFC neuron’s firing rates, incorporating various task variables as regressors. These task variables or regressors included the expected uncertainty regarding reward delay (σdelay = 2, 1, and 0.2 s), expected uncertainty regarding reward magnitude (σmagnitude = 80, 40, and 8 μl), expected or perceived magnitude without expected uncertainty (300, 150, and 30 μl), perceived reward delay with expected uncertainty (1, 2, 2.8, 3.2, 4, and 5 s), perceived reward magnitude with expected uncertainty (30, 70, 102, 118, 150, and 190 μl), reaction time, trial number, and cumulative harvested rewards. We used a significance threshold of P < 0.01 to determine whether any particular task variable statistically significantly modulated a neuron’s firing rates. In addition, to investigate how neuronal activity was affected by an interaction between the expected uncertainty and perceived reward, we included an interaction term in the GLM, where each regressor was normalized to enhance the interpretability of the potential interaction effect.

From these regression analyses, we calculated the percentage of neurons whose activity was significantly modulated by specific task variables, indicating that these neurons encoded those variables. Venn diagrams were used to visualize the overlap among neurons modulated by multiple task variables. The t value associated with each task variable served as a measure of the strength with which a neuron encoded the corresponding task variable. We chose to use t values over β coefficients because t values normalize coefficient estimates by their SEs, which accounts for variability and makes comparisons across neurons and models more reliable. This standardization helps minimize differences in scaling and variability that may arise from individual neuronal responses. In addition, if the signs of two correlation coefficients were the same (both “positive” or both “negative”), then we referred to them as having equal valence; if the signs were different, then we classified them as having nonequal valence. To examine the coding similarity of overlapping neurons, we analyzed the percentage of overlapping neurons exhibiting equal or nonequal valence. To assess similarities in population neural encoding, we analyzed correlations between t values associated with pairs of task variables across the neuronal population. To account for dependencies among samples from multiple observations per rat, we used linear mixed-effects models (LMEs) with individual rats treated as random effects.

Furthermore, to examine the sensitivity of OFC neurons to encode reward attributes under varying levels of expected uncertainty, we fitted GLMs to each neuron’s firing rates during reward delivery. The absolute value of the slope from these regressions for each neuron indicated its sensitivity in encoding a specific reward attribute under a given level of expected uncertainty.

### Modeling of expected uncertainty effects on reward-coding sensitivity

To investigate how neuronal encoding of perceived reward delay and magnitude is modulated by expected uncertainties, we proposed models 1 to 3 (Eqs. 1 to 3) to represent no modulation, negative modulation, and positive modulation of the sensitivity of reward attribute representations. In addition, to examine the effects of increased delays or magnitudes on neuronal encoding, we introduced model 4 (Eq. 4), which suggests that reduced neural coding sensitivity is due to longer delays or larger magnitudesFR=kx(1)FR=11+e−k(x−x¯)(2)FR=1k·log(x−x¯)(1−x+x¯)(3)FR=11+e−kx(4)where FR is the normalized firing rate of a neuron. x denotes the paired reward delays (1 s versus 5 s, 2 s versus 4 s, and 2.8 s versus 3.2 s) or paired reward magnitudes (30 μl versus 190 μl, 70 μl versus 150 μl, and 102 μl versus 118 μl); x¯ is the average of the delay (3 s) or magnitude (110 μl). The parameter k is used to adjust the slope of each curve, hence the sensitivity of the modulatory effect by expected uncertainties on neuronal encoding of reward delay or magnitude. The k was set to be 1, 2, and 8 for the three models, respectively, in Fig. 5.

---

**Fig. 1.**: Task design, behavioral performance, and recording electrode locations.

(A) Single-trial structure. House lights prompted rats to sample one of nine odors at an odor port, proceed to a nearby fluid well, and anticipate a sucrose solution reward following a delay. The trial concluded with the lights turned off, signaling the end of the current trial and the onset of the intertrial interval (ITI). (B) Schematic of task design. Nine odor cues predicted rewards with varying expected uncertainties. Odors 1 to 3 predicted two equally likely sucrose rewards with the same magnitude (110 μl) but different delays. Odors 4 to 6 predicted two equally likely outcomes with the same delay (3 s) but different magnitudes. Odors 7 to 9 predicted three different reward magnitudes with a fixed delay (3 s). The SD (σ) indicated the level of expected uncertainty following each odor cue. (C) Behavioral performance was assessed by the percentage of committed trials (% committed trials) and reaction time from withdrawing from the odor port to entering the fluid well. Data are shown as means + SEM. n = 242 sessions; *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.001, one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). n.s. not significant. (D) Coronal view of an example brain slice showing the recording site postrecording. (E) Reconstruction of recording locations. Red boxes indicate the estimated range and depth of recording sites included in the analysis.

*(image omitted)*

**Fig. 2.**: Dissociable neural codes for expected uncertainties and expected reward magnitudes before reward delivery.

(A to C) Example neurons showing significant activity correlations with expected uncertainty in reward delay (A), expected uncertainty in reward magnitude (B), and expected reward magnitude (mag.) (C) before reward delivery. Neural firing rates were modeled using Poisson GLM with a regressor of expected uncertainty in reward delay (σdelay), expected uncertainty in reward magnitude (σmagnitude), or expected reward magnitude without uncertainty. (D to F) Venn diagrams show the number of neurons selective to σdelay, σmagnitude, and expected reward magnitude (σ = 0). Bars show the percentages of neurons with equal or nonequal valence between t values that measured neuronal selectivity. Equal valence was defined as both t values being either positive or negative. Statistical significance was defined as P < 0.01. (G to I) Left: Correlations [Pearson’s r = 0.01, 0.08, and −0.09; P = 0.90, 0.026, and 4.2 × 10−6, linear mixed-effects model (LME)] between t values from regression analyses with regressors for σdelay, σmagnitude, or expected reward magnitude (σ = 0). Each dot represents one neuron (n = 4605 neurons). Right: Correlations between t values from regressions on neurons recorded from each rat. Each point represents an individual rat (n = 8 rats). Box plots show median and interquartile range. One-sample t test.

*(image omitted)*

**Fig. 3.**: Dissociable neural codes for expected uncertainties and expected reward magnitudes after reward delivery.

(A to C) Example neurons encoding expected uncertainty in reward delay (A), expected uncertainty in reward magnitude (B), and expected reward magnitude (C) after reward delivery. Neuronal firing rates were modeled using Poisson GLM with a regressor of expected uncertainty in reward delay (σdelay), expected uncertainty in reward magnitude (σmagnitude), or expected reward magnitude without uncertainty. (D to F) Venn diagrams show the number of neurons selective to σdelay, σmagnitude, and expected reward magnitude. Bars show the percentages of neurons with equal or nonequal valence between t values that measured neuronal selectivity. Statistical significance was defined as P < 0.01. (G to I) Left: Correlations (Pearson’s r = 0.12, −0.03, and −0.10; P = 0.04, 0.96, and 0.64, LME) between t values from regression analyses with regressors for σdelay, σmagnitude, or expected reward magnitude (σ = 0). Each point represents one neuron (n = 4605 neurons). Right: Correlations between t values from regressions on neurons recorded from each rat. Each dot represents one rat (n = 8 rats). Box plots show median and interquartile range. One-sample t test.

*(image omitted)*

**Fig. 4.**: Neuronal responses to perceived delay and magnitude of reward.

(A) Example neuron showing significant activity correlations with reward delay but not reward magnitude. Regression with Poisson GLM was performed to test statistical significance. (B) Example neuron encoding reward magnitude but not reward delay. (C) Venn diagram shows the number of neurons encoding perceived reward delay, reward magnitude, and reward magnitude without uncertainty. Bar graphs show the percentages of neurons with equal or nonequal valence in overlapping populations. Statistical significance was defined as P < 0.01. (D to F) Scatter plots show correlations between t values from regressions on individual neurons with different regressors (Pearson’s r = 0.05, 0.09, and 0.43; P = 0.73, 0.53, and 3.2 × 10−15, LME). Each point represents one neuron (n = 4605 neurons). (G) The same correlation analyses as in (D) to (F) were performed on neurons recorded from individual rats. Each point represents one rat (n = 8 rats). Box plot shows median and interquartile range. ***P < 0.001, one-sample t test.

*(image omitted)*

**Fig. 5.**: Diminished neural coding sensitivity to reward delay or magnitude with expected uncertainty.

(A) Top: Venn diagram shows the number of neurons encoding expected uncertainty in reward delay (σdelay), reward delay, or their interaction (σdelay × delay). Bottom: Venn diagram shows the number of neurons encoding expected uncertainty in reward magnitude (σmagnitude), reward magnitude, or their interaction (σmagnitude × magnitude). Statistical significance was defined as P < 0.01. (B) Three models illustrating how coding sensitivity to reward can be modulated by expected uncertainty. (C) Example neurons showing how regression slopes related to paired reward delays varied with the expected level of uncertainty. (D) Venn diagram shows the number of neurons encoding reward delay for each level of expected uncertainty (σdelay). Statistical significance was defined as P < 0.01. (E) Cumulative distributions (left) and means (right) of the absolute slope from regressions on firing rates of selective neurons to reward delays associated with different levels of expected uncertainty. Data are presented as means + SEM. ***P < 0.001, one-way ANOVA. (F) Example neurons showing how regression slopes related to paired reward magnitudes varied with the expected level of uncertainty. (G) Venn diagram shows the number of neurons encoding reward magnitude for each level of expected uncertainty (σmagnitude). Statistical significance was defined as P < 0.01. (H) Cumulative distributions (left) and means (right) of the absolute slope from regressions on firing rates of selective neurons to reward magnitudes associated with different levels of expected uncertainty. Data are presented as means + SEM. ***P < 0.001, one-way ANOVA.

*(image omitted)*

**Fig. 6.**: Diminished neural coding sensitivities explained by increased expected uncertainty but not reward delays or magnitudes.

(A) Model 1 illustrates diminished coding sensitivities due to longer delays or larger magnitudes, showing gradual decreases in the absolute slope between adjacent delays or magnitudes. (B) Model 2 demonstrates that diminished coding sensitivities caused by higher expected uncertainty, with the highest occurring between middle adjacent delays or magnitudes under low expected uncertainty. (C and D) Left: Bar graphs show the average coding sensitivity across selective neurons, measured by absolute slope from regressions using adjacent reward delays (C) or magnitudes (D). Right: The absolute slope changes along adjacent reward delays (C) or magnitudes (D) were better explained by model 2 compared to model 1. Data are presented as means + SEM. ***P < 0.001, paired t tests.

*(image omitted)*
