# Enhancing mRNA therapy through iterative delivery

DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.adx0916 Journal: Science Advances Published: 2025-10-01

**Authors:** Seaberg, Joshua, Gulla, Suresh Kumar, Labombarde, Jocelyn, Roy, Ram, Dwivedi, Shailendra Kumar Dhar, Xu, Chao, Kovats, Susan, Bhattacharya, Resham, Mukherjee, Priyabrata

## Abstract

Clinical translation of therapeutic messenger RNA (mRNA) technologies, particularly in solid tumors, has been limited due to unavailability of effective delivery systems. Here, we describe an mRNA delivery system that overcomes current challenges by co-encapsulating gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) and mRNA within non-ionic surfactant vehicles (NSVs) to create “Aurniosoves” (AuNSVs). Through in vitro and in vivo studies, we demonstrate that AuNSVs improve vector accumulation and uptake within the tumor, resulting in enhanced protein expression and therapeutic efficacy. Mechanistically, these effects are the result of an iterative delivery process in which AuNSVs enter cells initially through clathrin-mediated endocytosis (CME) and release AuNPs into the cytoplasm. AuNPs subsequently adsorb and inactivate cellular trafficking regulators PP2A and Rab7, producing two effects: (i) rapid entry of additional AuNSVs through activation of caveolin-mediated endocytosis (CvME) and (ii) endosomal escape through inhibited endolysosomal fusion. We propose that AuNSVs be exploited as next-generation mRNA delivery systems.

## INTRODUCTION

Messenger RNA (mRNA) is the blueprint that ribosomes use to make proteins. Since exogenously delivered mRNA can requisition ribosomes to synthesize proteins with therapeutic effect, mRNA therapy has extensive potential (11567101112

Here, we report a gold nanoparticle (AuNP)–doped, NSV-based mRNA delivery system, which we term an “Aurniosove” (AuNSV), validated through in vitro and in vivo studies with ovarian and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cell lines. We define the effects of AuNPs on AuNSV delivery through side-by-side comparison with analogous NSVs lacking AuNPs, showing how AuNSVs affect mRNA delivery to cancer cells and demonstrating how delivery of tumor-suppressing p53 mRNA using AuNSVs regulate tumor growth in p53-null mouse models. Finally, we show mechanistic studies that elucidate how the inclusion of AuNPs within AuNSVs promotes mRNA therapy at the biomolecular level.

## RESULTS

### Synthesis, characterization, and impact of AuNP-doped NSVs on mRNA delivery

mRNA-loaded AuNSVs were developed in a stepwise manner. NSVs were synthesized using a proprietary millifluidic synthesis procedure (Fig. 1A and Supplementary Materials). Our preliminary material selection experiments identified a lipid composition of 40% cholesterol, 25% Tween 80 non-ionic surfactant, and 35% dimethyldioctadecylammonium bromide (DDAB) cationic lipid as most promising for NSV formation through consideration of size, polydispersity index (PDI), and favorable electrostatic interactions with anionic AuNPs (fig. S1, A and B) (Fig. 1A13141516

Retention of AuNPs within AuNSVs was calculated as the ratio of characteristic surface plasmon resonance peaks (~524 nm for 20-nm AuNPs) between the bulk product collected directly at the outlet of the synthesis apparatus and the washed product after having undergone centrifugal washing (fig. S1M). While the 1:1 lipid:AuNP ratio showed ~60% AuNP retention, each of the other formulations showed >80% retention of AuNPs (fig. S1N). Using aggregation assays, we further determined that AuNPs are retained within AuNSVs and are protected from the external environment as there is no loss of surface plasmon resonance with exposure to 750 mM NaCl, whereas unprotected AuNPs display notable loss of surface plasmon resonance (fig. S1O). The 2.5:1 lipid:AuNP loading ratio was used throughout the study as it showed the highest incorporation of AuNPs (80.8% ± 1.0%) and was most effective at delivering green fluorescent protein (GFP) mRNA to TOV-112D cells (figs. S1N and S4A). Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) imaging of 2.5:1 AuNSVs revealed an amorphous lipid core containing electron-dense 20-nm AuNPs (fig. S1P).

We next tested AuNSV stability through phase changes and in varying storage conditions. We used sucrose as a cryoprotectant, as it is commonly used to enhance the stability of nanotherapeutics (Fig. 1A).17Fig. 1A

Having validated our AuNSV, we designed mRNA-loaded AuNSVs to study the effect of 20 nm AuNPs on mRNA delivery. mRNA coding for GFP (t1/2 ≈ 1 day) was either loaded directly into NSVs or co-loaded with AuNPs to create GFP NSVs and GFP AuNSVs, while mRNA coding for the tumor suppressor p53 was loaded into NSVs and AuNSVs to form p53 NSVs and p53 AuNSVs (Fig. 1A). Physicochemical characterization for each of these formulations revealed monodisperse nanoparticles with consistent hydrodynamic diameters approaching 150 nm, PDI of 0.3, a slightly cationic ζ potential, no reduction in mRNA loading (%) with co-encapsulation of AuNPs, and retention of the characteristic 20-nm AuNP absorbance peak (fig. S3, A to F; mRNA loading optimization in fig. S4A). TEM of p53 AuNSVs revealed a spherical amorphous structure with dispersed AuNPs (fig. S3G), and analysis of the micrographs revealed a population with a slightly smaller diameter than that measured via dynamic light scattering (DLS) (~120 nm versus ~150 nm; fig. S3H). From the TEM images, we identified that each p53 AuNSV encapsulated a mean of five AuNPs (fig. S3, I and J). Ultimately, mRNA-loaded AuNSVs retained >70% of AuNPs throughout the complete handling protocol (fig. S3K) and >85% of encapsulated mRNA after 72-hour exposure to 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (fig. S3L). On the basis of our characterization data, we conclude that both AuNPs and mRNA are stably encapsulated within the AuNSV structure and that the AuNSV surface is composed of Tween 80 with contributions from DDAB to produce a cationic ζ potential.t1/2 day) was either loaded directly into NSVs or co-loaded with AuNPs to create GFP NSVs and GFP AuNSVs, while mRNA coding for the tumor suppressor p53 was loaded into NSVs and AuNSVs to form p53 NSVs and p53 AuNSVs (≈1Fig. 1A

Next, we sought to identify the effects of AuNPs on the delivery of mRNA. We treated TOV-112D ovarian cancer cells for 24 hours with GFP mRNA delivered in either GFP NSVs or GFP AuNSVs in the concentration range predicted to be effective in the literature (Fig. 1, B and C, and fig. S4, B to D). As the concentration increased from 0.05 to 0.25 μg/ml, the GFP expression of TOV-112D cells treated with GFP AuNSVs increased until almost 73.9% ± 13.7% of cells treated with GFP AuNSVs were GFP+; in comparison, only 26.1% ± 5.6% of the cells in the GFP NSV group were GFP+ (Fig. 1C). When the treatment time was extended to 72 hours, the GFP+ population of GFP NSV-treated cells reached that of the GFP AuNSV-treated cells, suggesting that AuNPs improve delivery characteristics by increasing the rate of uptake or endosomal escape (fig. S4, E and F).1819Fig. 1, B and C+; in comparison, only 26.1% ± 5.6% of the cells in the GFP NSV group were GFP+ (Fig. 1C+ population of GFP NSV-treated cells reached that of the GFP AuNSV-treated cells, suggesting that AuNPs improve delivery characteristics by increasing the rate of uptake or endosomal escape (fig. S4, E and F).

To establish the generalizability of this finding, we treated four individual cancer cell lines, specifically TOV-112D (human ovarian cancer, p53-mutant), OVCAR8 (human ovarian cancer, p53-mutant), Hep3B (human HCC, p53-null), and ID8-p53(−/−)-Luc (murine ovarian cancer, p53-null) with GFP NSVs or GFP AuNSVs (Fig. 1D). For each cell line, GFP AuNSV treatment led to approximately 10-fold greater GFP expression in comparison with GFP NSV treatment, and thus, all cell lines were usable in subsequent experiments, although each was used for specific applications (Fig. 1E). For example, OVCAR8 cells readily form spheroids in vitro and thus were used to analyze AuNSV-based mRNA delivery to spheroids, where we observed increased uptake, protein expression, and therapeutic efficacy compared to delivery via NSV analogs (figs. S4, G and H, S6, A to G).Fig. 1DFig. 1E

We next studied biodistribution in Hep3B tumor-bearing mice to determine whether AuNSVs could deliver payloads to tumors in vivo. The near-infrared fluorophore 1,1′-dioctadecyl-3,3,3′,3′-tetramethylindotricarbocyanine iodide (DiR) was loaded into NSVs with or without AuNPs, and each mouse was given one injection of DiR NSVs or DiR AuNSVs by tail vein with periodic post-injection imaging (fig. S5, A to F). Total body radiant efficiency showed a peak for both DiR NSVs and AuNSVs at 24 hours with subsequent signal loss as DiR was cleared from the body (Fig. 1F). Clearance of DiR signal from the tumor tissue was reduced relative to the rest of the body, with the ratio of DiR radiant efficiency between the tumor region of interest and the whole animal increasing up to day 5 (fig. S5, G and H). Ex vivo imaging on day 5 confirmed an increase in tumor delivery from 10.4% ± 1.6% with DiR NSVs to 18.6% ± 3.6% with DiR AuNSVs (Fig. 1, G and H, and fig. S5I). This corresponded to a reduction in liver-localized DiR signal from 62.7% ± 3.8% with DiR NSVs to 49.6% ± 5.9% with DiR AuNSVs, which equated to a 2.5-fold increase in tumor to liver signal ratio for DiR AuNSVs in comparison to DiR NSVs (Fig. 1I and fig. S5I). Together, these data show that AuNSVs deliver cargo to the tumor with higher efficiency than NSVs lacking gold.Fig. 1FFig. 1, G and HFig. 1I

### p53 AuNSVs initiate apoptosis

With the proof of concept for enhanced mRNA delivery to cancer cells via AuNSV established, we next examined delivery of tumor-suppressing TP53 mRNA to p53-null Hep3B HCC cells as a model system to understand the effects of AuNSV-mediated delivery of a cancer-relevant mRNA. This model is highly translatable, as HCC risk factors, particularly the X gene of hepatitis B virus (HBx), are known to promote cancer progression by inhibiting p53-mediated DNA repair and apoptosis (t 1 2 ≈ 9 min) provides a rigorous model for studying mRNA vector delivery efficiency (TP53 mRNA compared to cells treated with p53 NSVs (Fig. 2A). Western blot and immunofluorescence (IF) confirmed that this increase in TP53 mRNA translated to an increase in p53 protein expression (Fig. 2, B to D). Moreover, IF for p53 showed that a larger proportion of cells were p53+ following p53 AuNSV treatment than treatment with p53 NSVs (Fig. 2C).TP53 mRNA to p53-null Hep3B HCC cells as a model system to understand the effects of AuNSV-mediated delivery of a cancer-relevant mRNA. This model is highly translatable, as HCC risk factors, particularly the X gene of hepatitis B virus (HBx), are known to promote cancer progression by inhibiting p53-mediated DNA repair and apoptosis (20 min) provides a rigorous model for studying mRNA vector delivery efficiency (t12≈921TP53 mRNA compared to cells treated with p53 NSVs (Fig. 2ATP53 mRNA translated to an increase in p53 protein expression (Fig. 2, B to D+ following p53 AuNSV treatment than treatment with p53 NSVs (Fig. 2C

We next examined whether restoration of wild-type (WT) p53 altered the phenotypes displayed by p53-null Hep3B cells. We initially observed that p53 AuNSVs reduced proliferation significantly more than did p53 NSVs (Fig. 2E). As p53 can promote both apoptosis and cell cycle arrest (1 population in Hep3B cells treated with p53 AuNSVs (20.0% ± 1.7%) in comparison to p53 NSVs (8.3% ± 1.7%; Fig. 2, F and G). Apoptotic pathway activation was further established by immunoblotting for proapoptotic factors Puma, Bax, and caspase-3 and prosurvival effectors BCL-xL and MCL-1 (Fig. 2H) and is corroborated in the literature (Fig. 2E221 population in Hep3B cells treated with p53 AuNSVs (20.0% ± 1.7%) in comparison to p53 NSVs (8.3% ± 1.7%; Fig. 2, F and GFig. 2H23

We selected two end-stage phenotypic assays to assess the therapeutic effect of p53 AuNSV therapy. We performed a terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase–mediated deoxyuridine triphosphate nick end labeling (TUNEL) assay on Hep3B cells treated for 24 hours with p53 mRNA (1 μg/ml) and observed a significantly increased proportion of apoptotic cells among those treated with p53 AuNSVs (24.2% ± 3.2% apoptotic cells) in comparison to p53 NSVs (15.8% ± 2.2% apoptotic cells; Fig. 2, I and J). We also quantified the clonogenic capacity of Hep3B cells treated with p53 NSVs and p53 AuNSVs through a colony formation assay and observed that treatment with p53 mRNA (0.1 μg/ml) delivered by p53 AuNSVs reduced colony size and number (125 ± 5.4 per well versus 167 ± 5.2 per well) in comparison to p53 NSV treatment (Fig. 2, K to M).Fig. 2, I and JFig. 2, K to M

Before moving to in vivo models, we wanted to corroborate the efficacy of p53 AuNSV therapy in three-dimensional (3D) cell culture. Accordingly, we formed OVCAR8 spheroids in non-adherent plates and treated them with p53 mRNA (0.5 μg/ml) delivered by p53 NSVs and p53 AuNSVs. In addition to spheroid growth inhibition (fig. S6, A to E), we observed that p53 AuNSVs reduced spheroid viability by 47.1% ± 4.6% in comparison to untreated controls, while p53 NSV treatment reduced viability only 30.3% ± 4.3% (fig. S6F). This reduction in viability correlated with elevated caspase-3/7 activity [5.6 ± 0.7 p53 NSV versus 8.0 ± 0.9 p53 AuNSV, fold improvement over no treatment (NT)], showing that delivery of WT p53 can activate apoptosis even in p53-mutant cancer cells (fig. S6G). Together, our in vitro results show that 20-nm AuNPs co-encapsulated in a p53 mRNA delivery vector enhance uptake and protein translation, resulting in improved anticancer effect.

### AuNSVs improve mRNA therapy in vivo

We next sought to substantiate our in vitro findings in vivo. We implanted p53-null Hep3B cancer cells subcutaneously into athymic nude mice and randomized them to one of four groups (saline control, AuNSV vehicle control, p53 NSV treatment, or p53 AuNSV treatment; Fig. 3A). Treatment with p53 mRNA (0.5 mg/kg) was selected as a mean value to expect tumor growth inhibition in p53-null tumor models (3, treatment was initiated and tumor volume was measured over time. Each animal received eight treatments, and tumor mass was recorded when humane endpoints were reached or when any group fell below 20% survival (day 26). We observed significant tumor growth inhibition in the p53 AuNSV treatment group in comparison to all other groups, with p53 AuNSV–treated tumors displaying <50% of the volume of the other groups by the end of the study (Fig. 3, B and C, and fig. S7, A to E). We also found an improvement in survival (100% versus 16.7% alive at end of study, P = 0.0276, p53 AuNSV versus AuNSV; Fig. 3D) and that tumors in the p53 AuNSV group were 34.0% ± 8.4% of the mean tumor mass of the p53 NSV treatment group at study endpoints, a 66% reduction (p53 AuNSV versus p53 NSV; Fig. 3, E and F).Fig. 3A1819243, treatment was initiated and tumor volume was measured over time. Each animal received eight treatments, and tumor mass was recorded when humane endpoints were reached or when any group fell below 20% survival (day 26). We observed significant tumor growth inhibition in the p53 AuNSV treatment group in comparison to all other groups, with p53 AuNSV–treated tumors displaying <50% of the volume of the other groups by the end of the study (Fig. 3, B and CP = 0.0276, p53 AuNSV versus AuNSV; Fig. 3DFig. 3, E and F

These macroscopic observations are supported at the microscopic level through histological analysis of the tumor tissues. In comparison to p53 NSV–treated tumors, p53 AuNSV–treated tumors showed a 41.0% reduction in proliferating (Ki67+) cells per 10× field (41.1 ± 4.0 versus 69.7 ± 5.4), a 64% increase in cleaved caspase-3 staining area (a marker of apoptosis, 2.73 ± 0.38 versus 1.67 ± 0.28), and twice the proportion of TUNEL+ apoptotic cells (3.58% ± 0.56% versus 1.75% ± 0.28%; Fig. 3, G to K). Moreover, we observed 57% less tumor fibrosis as quantified by alpha-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) staining area (0.46 ± 0.07 versus 1.07 ± 0.18, p53 AuNSV versus p53 NSV; fig. S7, F and G) along with reduced microvascularity (CD31 vessels per 20× image, 61.2 ± 5.5 versus 90.7 ± 8.1, p53 AuNSV versus saline; fig. S7H). These findings were corroborated by immunoblot analyses of p53 AuNSV–treated tumor lysates, which showed enhanced p53 expression along with downstream apoptotic [Puma, Bax, and poly(adenosine diphosphate–ribose) polymerase (PARP) proapoptotic; BCL-xL and BCL-2 prosurvival] and cell cycle arrest (p21 anti-cyclic; cyclin E1 procyclic) responses with p53 AuNSV treatment compared to p53 NSV treatment (fig. S7I). No acute toxicity was detected either observationally or in histological sections of any of the treatment groups (fig. S7J). While p53 NSV treatment showed trends toward therapeutic efficacy as measured by tumor volume at last treatment (Fig. 3C) and cleaved caspase-3 area at endpoint (Fig. 3I), delivery inefficiencies may have ultimately resulted in no quantifiable therapeutic effects in this group.+) cells per 10× field (41.1 ± 4.0 versus 69.7 ± 5.4), a 64% increase in cleaved caspase-3 staining area (a marker of apoptosis, 2.73 ± 0.38 versus 1.67 ± 0.28), and twice the proportion of TUNEL+ apoptotic cells (3.58% ± 0.56% versus 1.75% ± 0.28%; Fig. 3, G to KFig. 3CFig. 3I

We subsequently used a syngeneic intraperitoneal model of ovarian cancer to further determine the ability of p53 AuNSV therapy to inhibit tumor growth in an immunocompetent mouse model. The delivery efficacy and ability to induce apoptosis of p53 AuNSVs on ID8-p53(−/−)-Luc cells were first confirmed in vitro through Western blot and TUNEL assays, which displayed marked improvements in p53 expression and TUNEL+ cells (17.6% ± 1.5% for p53 AuNSV versus 2.6% ± 0.48% for p53 NSV; Fig. 4, A to C). Next, ID8-p53(−/−)-Luc cells were injected into the intraperitoneal cavity of female C57BL/6 albino mice and allowed to grow for 2 weeks. On day 14, the animals were randomized to one of four groups and therapy was initiated (0.5 mg/kg p53 mRNA as justified above, 3× per week intraperitoneally, eight injections followed by one injection per week on an ongoing basis; fig. S8, A to D). Animals were euthanized when they reached humane endpoint criteria, and the study was terminated when any group fell below 20% survival (Fig. 4D) (+ cells (17.6% ± 1.5% for p53 AuNSV versus 2.6% ± 0.48% for p53 NSV; Fig. 4, A to CFig. 4D25

Upon study completion, there was a greater proportion of animals in the p53 AuNSV group that had not met humane endpoint criteria than in any other group (Fig. 4E and fig. S8E). p53 mRNA therapy significantly reduced the number of cancer nodules identified on the inferior diaphragm of each mouse from 17.2 ± 1.3 for saline to 10.7 ± 1.3 for p53 NSV and 8.2 ± 0.9 for p53 AuNSV, although the difference between vehicle delivery groups was insignificant (Fig. 4, F and G). However, when we isolated the ascites and separated the single cells from cancer spheroids, the average spheroid size in the p53 AuNSV group was 43% smaller than those in the p53 NSV group (57.2% ± 8.0% relative size of p53 AuNSV spheroids versus p53 NSV spheroid mean; Fig. 4H). Despite no detectable differences in volume or number of cells in ascites fluid, flow cytometry analysis showed a greater number of macrophage-like cells with high Ly6C expression with p53 AuNSV treatment (1.06 × 106 ± 2.91 × 105 Ly6Chigh macrophage-like cells with p53 AuNSVs versus 4.85 × 105 ± 3.08 × 105 with p53 NSVs and 8.86 × 104 ± 2.65 × 104 with saline; Fig. 4, I to K, and fig. S8, F to I). As Ly6Chigh expression is characteristic of circulating monocytes and recently extravasated macrophages, this result is indicative of an enhanced influx of monocytes into the ascites, a trend that is also observed with cisplatin chemotherapy and correlates with an inflammatory anticancer tumor microenvironment (+ T cells in the ascites (fig. S8, J to M). Additionally, we observed no differences in blood monocyte, white blood cell, lymphocyte, neutrophil, or hemoglobin concentrations, providing evidence for hematological nontoxicity (fig. S8, N to R). From these xenograft and syngeneic models, we conclude that AuNSV delivery significantly improves the therapeutic efficacy of mRNA-based cancer therapy in vivo.Fig. 4EFig. 4, F and GFig. 4H6 ± 2.91 × 105 Ly6Chigh macrophage-like cells with p53 AuNSVs versus 4.85 × 105 ± 3.08 × 105 with p53 NSVs and 8.86 × 104 ± 2.65 × 104 with saline; Fig. 4, I to Khigh expression is characteristic of circulating monocytes and recently extravasated macrophages, this result is indicative of an enhanced influx of monocytes into the ascites, a trend that is also observed with cisplatin chemotherapy and correlates with an inflammatory anticancer tumor microenvironment (26+ T cells in the ascites (fig. S8, J to M). Additionally, we observed no differences in blood monocyte, white blood cell, lymphocyte, neutrophil, or hemoglobin concentrations, providing evidence for hematological nontoxicity (fig. S8, N to R). From these xenograft and syngeneic models, we conclude that AuNSV delivery significantly improves the therapeutic efficacy of mRNA-based cancer therapy in vivo.

### Mechanistic insight into AuNSV delivery

We next sought to investigate the mechanism(s) of action by which AuNSVs impart these effects. We initially assessed cellular uptake using fluorophore-labeled NSVs and AuNSVs. AuNSVs were tagged with Cy5 (excitation, 651 nm; emission, 670 nm) or nitrobenzodiazole (NBD; excitation, 467 nm; emission, 539 nm) by adding fluorophore-conjugated phospholipids [1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-N-(cyanine 5) (Cy5-PE) or 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-N-(7-nitro-2-1,3-benzoxadiazol-4-yl) (ammonium salt) (NBD-PE)] into the lipid mixture before synthesis, allowing us to study the delivery vehicle rather than a cargo. NBD-labeled AuNSVs were used in flow cytometry uptake experiments to allow the signal of internalized vehicles to be isolated by quenching surface-associated fluorescence with trypan blue (fig. S9, A to C), while Cy5-labeled AuNSVs were used in microscopy experiments due to reduced cellular autofluorescence in that spectral range. Initial studies of NSV and AuNSV uptake in TOV-112D cells showed no difference in fluorescence intensity or NBD+ cell population after 30-min delivery of NBD-labeled NSVs or AuNSVs (Fig. 5A). After 2 hours of delivery, however, there was a 32.1% ± 5.8% increase in uptake of NBD AuNSVs in comparison to NBD NSVs, suggesting that AuNPs mediate a change in nanoparticle uptake within 2 hours of treatment initiation (Fig. 5B).N-(cyanine 5) (Cy5-PE) or 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-N-(7-nitro-2-1,3-benzoxadiazol-4-yl) (ammonium salt) (NBD-PE)] into the lipid mixture before synthesis, allowing us to study the delivery vehicle rather than a cargo. NBD-labeled AuNSVs were used in flow cytometry uptake experiments to allow the signal of internalized vehicles to be isolated by quenching surface-associated fluorescence with trypan blue (fig. S9, A to C), while Cy5-labeled AuNSVs were used in microscopy experiments due to reduced cellular autofluorescence in that spectral range. Initial studies of NSV and AuNSV uptake in TOV-112D cells showed no difference in fluorescence intensity or NBD+ cell population after 30-min delivery of NBD-labeled NSVs or AuNSVs (Fig. 5AFig. 5B

On the basis of this observation, we performed uptake inhibition studies after 30 min and 2 hours of uptake using Cy5-labeled NSVs or AuNSVs to identify the pathway by which the vehicles enter cells. Chlorpromazine (CPZ) was used to inhibit clathrin-mediated endocytosis (CME), methyl-β-cyclodextrin (MβCD), and filipin to inhibit caveolae-mediated endocytosis (CvME), 5-(N-ethyl-N-isopropyl)-amiloride (EIPA) to inhibit macropinocytosis (MPC), and sodium azide (NaN3) to inhibit all forms of active transport (fig. S9D). At the 30-min time point, both Cy5 NSV and Cy5 AuNSV endocytosis was inhibited >50% in the presence of CPZ and marginally by EIPA (Fig. 5C). This suggests that both vectors enter the cell predominantly via CME and to a lesser extent by MPC, which is consistent with previous studies (Fig. 5D and fig. S9, E and F), highlighting an AuNP-mediated shift in uptake from CME to CvME. This shift in uptake pathway was also observed in a panel of cancer cell lines previously shown to display enhanced mRNA delivery and translation with AuNSV vectors (Fig. 5E and fig. S9, G to I). Together, this evidence indicates that inclusion of AuNPs in NSV vectors induces cancer cells to preferentially activate CvME after initial uptake by CME, resulting in increased uptake of additional AuNSVs.N-ethyl-N-isopropyl)-amiloride (EIPA) to inhibit macropinocytosis (MPC), and sodium azide (NaN3) to inhibit all forms of active transport (fig. S9D). At the 30-min time point, both Cy5 NSV and Cy5 AuNSV endocytosis was inhibited >50% in the presence of CPZ and marginally by EIPA (Fig. 5C2728Fig. 5DFig. 5E

Biological inhibition presents further substantiation for an AuNSV-mediated shift to CvME. Using lentiviral-mediated transduction of short hairpin RNA (shRNA) and subsequent isolation and purification, we performed a stable knockdown (KD) of caveolin-1 (Cav-1; a key structural protein in caveolae) in TOV-112D cells to biologically inhibit CvME (Fig. 6A). When we used the Cav-1 KD cells in uptake studies, the increase in total vector uptake with AuNSVs in comparison to NSVs observed in the WT cells was lost (Fig. 6B and fig. S9J). At the same time, we observed an uptake dependence on CME for both vectors with 2 hours of delivery, thus confirming the critical role of Cav-1 on the augmented uptake of AuNSVs (Fig. 6C). When we treated TOV-112D WT and Cav-1 KD cells with Cy5 GFP NSVs and Cy5 GFP AuNSVs for 24 hours, we observed a near 2.5-fold increase in uptake for AuNSVs in comparison to NSVs in WT cells, but not in Cav-1 KD cells (Fig. 6, D and E). This points to differential vector uptake as being a key factor in AuNSV-augmented mRNA delivery.Fig. 6AFig. 6BFig. 6CFig. 6, D and E

Endosomal escape is regarded as the rate-limiting step for RNA therapeutics. (Fig. 7, A and B). As such, AuNSVs not only promote differential vector uptake but also enhance endosomal escape. For corroborating evidence, we performed colocalization analysis of Cy5 GFP NSVs and AuNSVs with LysoTracker (a marker of lysosomes) and observed a 25% decrease in the M1 colocalization coefficient of Cy5 GFP AuNSVs in comparison to Cy5 GFP NSVs (0.628 ± 0.028 versus 0.839 ± 0.032; Fig. 7, C and D). Together, we conclude that AuNSV uptake occurs through a preferential shift toward CvME, which corresponds to enhanced endosomal escape and reduced lysosomal degradation.2930Fig. 7, A and BFig. 7, C and D

We next sought to identify the specific biomaterial interactions responsible for the observed shift in endocytosis and increased endosomal escape. Prior studies have revealed that 20-nm AuNPs adsorb and inactivate enzymes including PP2A (mediator of caveolae recycling and lipid raft fluidity) and the small guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase) KRAS (28313334

We first confirmed that AuNPs are released from AuNSVs in the presence of reduced glutathione (GSH) at concentrations found in cancer cells. To test this, we incubated AuNSVs in 750 mM NaCl supplemented with 1 mM GSH (Fig. 8A), conditions under which electrostatic repulsion between free anionic AuNPs is mitigated and AuNPs aggregate, thus losing their optical properties and allowing us to track the release of free AuNPs. At both 1 and 10 mM GSH, we observed high AuNP release and near-complete aggregation within 60 min of exposure (fig. S10, A to C).Fig. 8A

Next, we identified PP2A and Rab7 in the protein corona of AuNPs. As a control, we coated the surface of AuNPs with thiol-conjugated poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) to block the nanoparticle surface and prevent proteins from binding (PEG-AuNP; characterization in fig. S10, D to G). PEG-AuNPs did not adsorb either protein of interest, whereas bare AuNPs displayed both PP2A and Rab7 in the protein corona (Fig. 8B). Our previous research has shown that AuNPs can interact with proteins electrostatically via heparin binding domains (Fig. 8C). Next, we incubated AuNPs in cell lysates with and without addition of heparin and noticed a reduction in AuNP pulldown of PP2A (Fig. 8D). The same effect was not seen for Rab7, leading us to hypothesize that cysteine residues mediate Rab7-AuNP binding through formation of Au-thiol bonds (Fig. 8D). The electrostatic binding of PP2A and the thiol-dependent binding of Rab7 were further supported with AuNSV pulldown after pretreatment with BME or heparin: Reduction in the number of available thiol groups inhibited Rab7 binding, while PP2A binding increased, whereas heparin-mediated electrostatic inhibition reduced PP2A binding but enhanced Rab7 pulldown (Fig. 8E and fig. S10H).Fig. 8B35Fig. 8CFig. 8D36Fig. 8DFig. 8E

With the mechanism of Rab7 and PP2A adsorption established, we performed assays to determine the effect of AuNP and AuNSV treatment on their activities. PP2A activity was quantified using a PP2A-specific colorimetric phosphatase activity assay. After 24 hours of treatment with AuNPs, we observed that AuNP treatment reduced PP2A activity by 20.1% ± 4.7%, an effect not observed with PEGylated AuNPs (fig. S10I). Similarly, when cells were treated with NSVs and AuNSVs, we identified a 23.8% ± 2.6% reduction in PP2A activity for AuNSV treatment relative to NSV treatment (Fig. 8F). Coinciding with reduced PP2A activity was a marked increase in phosphorylation of Cav-1 (Fig. 8G), which concurs with the literature connecting PP2A inhibition to preferential activation of CvME (Fig. 8FFig. 8G3137

Rab7 activation was assessed using Rab-interacting lysosomal protein (RILP) pulldown, which binds specifically to the active form of Rab7 (fig. S10J). Briefly, glutathione S-transferase (GST)–RILP fusion protein was produced in BL21 cells and isolated on GSH beads, and the RILP beads were subsequently used to pull down active Rab7 in lysates of cells treated with NSVs and AuNSVs. After 24 hours, we observed that AuNP treatment reduced Rab7 activation by 37.2% ± 5.0% in comparison to untreated controls (Fig. 8H and fig. S10K) and that AuNSV treatment corresponded to a 18.6% ± 4.5% reduction in Rab7 activation as compared to NSV treatment (Fig. 8, I and J). As endosomal escape of LNPs has been reported to occur most frequently in hybrid early-late endosomal compartments (+ cells observed with AuNSV delivery. Thus, we have identified two enzymes critical to the intracellular trafficking network that adsorb to the AuNP surface and are rendered unable to perform their requisite actions, resulting in enhanced vector uptake and endosomal escape. Our proposed mechanistic model of AuNSV delivery is outlined in Fig. 9.Fig. 8HFig. 8, I and J27+ cells observed with AuNSV delivery. Thus, we have identified two enzymes critical to the intracellular trafficking network that adsorb to the AuNP surface and are rendered unable to perform their requisite actions, resulting in enhanced vector uptake and endosomal escape. Our proposed mechanistic model of AuNSV delivery is outlined in Fig. 9

## DISCUSSION

Here, we developed AuNSVs as a previously unreported class of hybrid mRNA delivery system. We observed markedly improved delivery performance for AuNSVs in vitro and in vivo in comparison to NSVs. This was determined to result from an iterative delivery mechanism through which AuNPs inactivate mediators of lipid raft stability and endosomal trafficking, resulting in significantly increased vector uptake and endosomal escape.

Whereas the idea of external targeting via surface-conjugated ligands is commonplace (Science report, which showed that the uptake of liposomes in cancer cells can be inversely predicted by expression of SLC46A3 (a lysosomal transporter protein) (3243839Science report, which showed that the uptake of liposomes in cancer cells can be inversely predicted by expression of SLC46A3 (a lysosomal transporter protein) (40

The multifactorial effects of AuNPs on mRNA delivery necessitate a multifactorial explanation. We showed that AuNPs activate a biological switch to CvME and promote endosomal escape by binding and inhibiting Rab7 and PP2A, enzymes that regulate endolysosomal fusion and caveolar stability/internalization, respectively. This is accomplished via incorporation of Rab7 and PP2A into the AuNP protein corona, where their conformations and functions are altered through the adsorption process (14 (4114 (3137424344

In conjunction with superior uptake, AuNSVs display enhanced endosomal escape. Rab7 is integral to endosomal escape strategies used by pathogens and engineered therapeutics alike, and inhibition of endosomal maturation has been linked to endosomal escape through increased transport time and delayed acidification (et al. hypothesized that retarding intracellular trafficking would improve the release of RNA therapeutics into the cytoplasm (274547et al. hypothesized that retarding intracellular trafficking would improve the release of RNA therapeutics into the cytoplasm (2732

We have shown that disruption of the endocytic nanoenvironment through inhibition of mediator proteins can significantly enhance uptake through iterative delivery while simultaneously allowing use of highly stable and available lipid components in a simple vehicle design. On the basis of this starting point, further studies will improve our understanding of how self-therapeutic nanomaterials can be used to promote vector uptake and endosomal escape through dysregulation of endosomal trafficking, and we anticipate that the elucidated AuNSV delivery mechanism will spark the development of “internally targeted” nanosystems. We next plan to investigate AuNSV delivery of diverse therapeutics in both cancer- and non–cancer-related pathologies, and we propose that this hybrid nanosystem and its previously unexploited mechanism of action could form the basis for a wide array of next-generation therapeutics.

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

### Chemicals and media

All chemicals, materials, and assay kits were purchased from reputable suppliers (see the Supplementary Materials for details).

### AuNSV synthesis and characterization

Colloidal AuNPs (20 nm) were synthesized from a bottom-up process as previously reported (28

### Cell culture

Cell lines were cultured in a biological safety cabinet under sterile conditions and incubated at 37°C in a 5% CO2 atmosphere. Additional detail is provided in the Supplementary Materials.2 atmosphere. Additional detail is provided in the Supplementary Materials.

### GFP delivery with live-cell microscopy and flow cytometry

TOV-112D cells were seeded overnight in 6-cm cell culture dishes at a density of 3 × 105 cells per dish. GFP NSVs (25:1 lipid:mRNA w/w, BioCap GFP mRNA, PhaRNA LLC) or GFP AuNSVs (2.5:1 lipid:AuNP w/w; 25:1 lipid:mRNA w/w, BioCap GFP mRNA) were added to cell medium to a final concentration of 0.05, 0.1, or 0.25 μg/ml mRNA. After 24 hours, cells were washed twice in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and imaged on a Axio Observer Z1 fluorescent microscope (Carl Zeiss). Cells were then lifted with 0.25% trypsin and washed in PBS. Samples were fed into a BD FACSCelesta Cell Analyzer (Becton Dickinson) to collect fluorescence and scatter data, with data interpretation and graph production completed in FlowJo. Three replicates were performed, with two of these incorporating live-cell microscopy imaging to confirm delivery.5 cells per dish. GFP NSVs (25:1 lipid:mRNA w/w, BioCap GFP mRNA, PhaRNA LLC) or GFP AuNSVs (2.5:1 lipid:AuNP w/w; 25:1 lipid:mRNA w/w, BioCap GFP mRNA) were added to cell medium to a final concentration of 0.05, 0.1, or 0.25 μg/ml mRNA. After 24 hours, cells were washed twice in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and imaged on a Axio Observer Z1 fluorescent microscope (Carl Zeiss). Cells were then lifted with 0.25% trypsin and washed in PBS. Samples were fed into a BD FACSCelesta Cell Analyzer (Becton Dickinson) to collect fluorescence and scatter data, with data interpretation and graph production completed in FlowJo. Three replicates were performed, with two of these incorporating live-cell microscopy imaging to confirm delivery.

### GFP delivery with fixed cell microscopy

TOV-112D, OVCAR8, Hep3B, and ID8-p53(−/−)-Luc cells were seeded overnight (25,000 cells per well in 0.5-ml medium) on 12-mm glass microscope coverslips rinsed in 70% ethanol and placed in 24-well plates. Cells were treated with GFP NSVs or GFP AuNSVs at a concentration of 0.25 μg/ml for 24 hours. Next, the medium was aspirated, cells were washed 3× in PBS, fixed for 20 min at room temperature in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in PBS, washed 3× in PBS, stained with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI), and mounted on microscope slides (denoted as “standard fixing and staining protocol”). Slides were kept overnight at 4°C and visualized with fluorescence microscopy the following day. Image quantification was accomplished using an ImageJ FIJI script.

### p53 delivery with RT-qPCR

Hep3B cells were seeded overnight in six-well plates (3 × 105 per well). The next day, the medium was replaced with medium containing p53 mRNA (1 μg/ml) delivered via p53 NSV or p53 AuNSV. Treatment was continued for 24 hours until cells were washed and lysed using a Quick-RNA MiniPrep kit following the manufacturer’s instructions (Zymo Research). Extracted RNA concentration and purity was measured using a NanoDrop spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). mRNA was converted into cDNA in a 20-μl reaction using an iScript cDNA synthesis kit (Bio-Rad) following the manufacturer’s instructions. An iTaq Universal One-Step RT-qPCR kit (Bio-Rad) was used to perform reverse transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) on a Bio-Rad CFX Connect instrument as per the manufacturer’s instructions with custom TP53 primers and housekeeping genes glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) and β-actin. Relative mRNA abundance was calculated using the −ΔΔCt method.5 per well). The next day, the medium was replaced with medium containing p53 mRNA (1 μg/ml) delivered via p53 NSV or p53 AuNSV. Treatment was continued for 24 hours until cells were washed and lysed using a Quick-RNA MiniPrep kit following the manufacturer’s instructions (Zymo Research). Extracted RNA concentration and purity was measured using a NanoDrop spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). mRNA was converted into cDNA in a 20-μl reaction using an iScript cDNA synthesis kit (Bio-Rad) following the manufacturer’s instructions. An iTaq Universal One-Step RT-qPCR kit (Bio-Rad) was used to perform reverse transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) on a Bio-Rad CFX Connect instrument as per the manufacturer’s instructions with custom TP53 primers and housekeeping genes glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) and β-actin. Relative mRNA abundance was calculated using the −ΔΔCt method.

### Immunoblotting

Hep3B cells were cultured as previously described. Cells (3 × 105) were seeded into 6-cm dishes containing two 12-mm microscope coverslips and incubated overnight before being dosed with p53 NSVs and p53 AuNSVs (1 μg/ml). The cells were treated for 24 hours before the coverslips were removed for p53 IF and TUNEL assays. The remaining cells were washed in PBS twice and lysed with radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer on ice in the presence of protease inhibitor (1:100, v/v; Pierce, Appleton, WI, USA). Lysed cells were scraped and collected after 15 min; collected cell lysates were maintained on ice for an additional 5 min and then centrifuged at 12,500 rpm for 5 min before the supernatant was removed for protein quantification. Protein quantification was accomplished via Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Cell lysates (5 to 20 μg) were incubated at 95°C for 5 min in 6× Laemmli buffer with BME and loaded onto 12% tris-glycine SDS–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) gels. The gels were run at 80 to 100 V until the dye front approached the edge of the gel (2 to 3 hours). The separated proteins were transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride membranes (90 V for 90 min at 4°C). Membranes were blocked with 5% skim milk in tris-buffered saline with Tween 20 (TBST) for 1 hour at room temperature before incubation overnight at 4°C with primary antibodies diluted in 5% bovine serum albumin (BSA) (1:1000: p53, Puma, Bax, MCL-1, BCL-xL, caspase-3, cyclin E1; 1:10,000: α-tubulin). Membranes were washed three times in TBST for 5 min before 1-hour incubation at room temperature with horseradish peroxidase–conjugated secondary antibodies (1:10,000). Membranes were washed an additional three times in TBST for 5 min each and then dipped in Clarity Western ECL substrate (Bio-Rad) for image capture via x-ray. Developed films were scanned, and band intensity was quantified using ImageJ FIJI. Mean band intensity was normalized first to α-tubulin and then to the NT control.5) were seeded into 6-cm dishes containing two 12-mm microscope coverslips and incubated overnight before being dosed with p53 NSVs and p53 AuNSVs (1 μg/ml). The cells were treated for 24 hours before the coverslips were removed for p53 IF and TUNEL assays. The remaining cells were washed in PBS twice and lysed with radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer on ice in the presence of protease inhibitor (1:100, v/v; Pierce, Appleton, WI, USA). Lysed cells were scraped and collected after 15 min; collected cell lysates were maintained on ice for an additional 5 min and then centrifuged at 12,500 rpm for 5 min before the supernatant was removed for protein quantification. Protein quantification was accomplished via Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Cell lysates (5 to 20 μg) were incubated at 95°C for 5 min in 6× Laemmli buffer with BME and loaded onto 12% tris-glycine SDS–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) gels. The gels were run at 80 to 100 V until the dye front approached the edge of the gel (2 to 3 hours). The separated proteins were transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride membranes (90 V for 90 min at 4°C). Membranes were blocked with 5% skim milk in tris-buffered saline with Tween 20 (TBST) for 1 hour at room temperature before incubation overnight at 4°C with primary antibodies diluted in 5% bovine serum albumin (BSA) (1:1000: p53, Puma, Bax, MCL-1, BCL-xL, caspase-3, cyclin E1; 1:10,000: α-tubulin). Membranes were washed three times in TBST for 5 min before 1-hour incubation at room temperature with horseradish peroxidase–conjugated secondary antibodies (1:10,000). Membranes were washed an additional three times in TBST for 5 min each and then dipped in Clarity Western ECL substrate (Bio-Rad) for image capture via x-ray. Developed films were scanned, and band intensity was quantified using ImageJ FIJI. Mean band intensity was normalized first to α-tubulin and then to the NT control.

### p53 IF microscopy

Hep3B cells were seeded and treated on 12-mm glass coverslips as described above. After treatment, the coverslips were placed in a 24-well plate, washed three times in PBS, fixed for 20 min at room temperature in 4% PFA in PBS, washed three times in PBS, and permeabilized in 0.1% Triton X-100 for 20 min at room temperature. Slides were washed in PBS three times before blocking in 2% BSA in PBS with 1% Tween 20 (PBST) for 1 hour at room temperature. After BSA was removed, slides were washed in PBST (3× for 5 min) and incubated overnight on a rocker table in 2% BSA in PBST containing p53 primary antibody [1:200, SC-126, anti-p53 mouse monoclonal antibody (DO-1), Santa Cruz Biotechnology]. The next day, slides were washed three times in PBST before incubation for 1.5 hours at room temperature with goat anti-mouse immunoglobulin G (IgG) (H+L) secondary antibody, Alexa Fluor 488 conjugate (1:1000, A-11030, Invitrogen) in PBST with 2% BSA. Slides were rinsed in PBST three times, stained with DAPI, and mounted on microscope slides. Slides were dried overnight and visualized the following day. Image p53 expression was quantified using an ImageJ FIJI script.

### BrdU proliferation assay

Cell proliferation was measured using an Abcam BrdU Cell Proliferation ELISA Kit (colorimetric, ab126556). Hep3B cells were seeded in 96-well plates at 2000 cells per well. Cells were treated with medium containing 5-bromo-2′-deoxyuridine (BrdU) and p53 NSVs (1 μg/ml), p53 AuNSVs (1 μg/ml), or equivalent vehicle controls for 24 hours. Cisplatin (10 μM) was used as a positive control. After 24 hours, cells were fixed and BrdU incorporation was determined using the manufacturer’s protocol.

### Cell cycle assay

Hep3B cells were seeded in six-well plates at a density of 200,000 cells per well. Cells were treated for 24 hours in serum-free medium according to their assigned treatment group [NT control, NSV or AuNSV vehicle control, p53 NSV (0.25 μg/ml), p53 AuNSV (0.25 μg/ml), or 10 μM cisplatin]. After 24 hours, 3.5× volume of complete medium was added to each well and the cells were incubated for an additional 24 hours. Cells were lifted with 0.25% trypsin, washed in PBS, and fixed in ice-cold 70% ethanol for 1 hour. Fixed cells were washed once in PBS and stained with FxCycle PI/RNase Staining Solution (Thermo Fisher Scientific, catalog number [F10797](F10797)). Scatter and fluorescence intensity data were collected with a FACSCelesta flow cytometer and analyzed with FlowJo. Cell populations were determined using an univariate Dean-Jett Fox (DJF) model.[F10797](F10797)

### TUNEL assay

Hep3B apoptosis was assessed using a DeadEnd Fluorometric TUNEL System (Product G3250) according to the manufacturer’s protocols. Hep3B cells were seeded and treated on 12-mm glass coverslips as described in the immunoblotting protocol. Treated cells on 12-mm coverslips were placed in a 24-well plate and washed and fixed using the standard protocol. After fixation, cells were permeabilized in 0.1% Triton X-100 for 5 min at room temperature and washed in PBS, and apoptotic cells were stained according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Coverslips were mounted with DAPI and imaged using fluorescence microscopy with analysis performed using an ImageJ FIJI script. Each chart data point represents one high-magnification image, with five analyzed per replicate.

### Colony formation assay

The clonogenic capacity of Hep3B cells was assessed using a colony formation assay. Hep3B cells were counted and diluted to a concentration of 200 cells/ml. Diluted cells were separated into 12-ml aliquots and treated as designated [NT, p53 NSVs (0.1 mg/ml), p53 AuNSVs (0.1 mg/ml)]. Treated cells were dispensed into six-well plates (three wells with 4-ml cells in each). After 10 days of incubation, the medium was aspirated and cells were stained and fixed in 20% methanol containing 0.1% crystal violet for 2 hours at room temperature. Stained cells were washed once in deionized water and dried overnight. Plates were imaged using a GelCount colony scanner (Oxford Optronix, UK), and images were analyzed using an ImageJ FIJI script.

### Housing and animal ethics statement

Male and female athymic nude mice and female C57BL/6 albino mice (5 to 6 weeks old) were purchased from Charles River Laboratories (Houston, TX, USA). Animals were housed in pathogen-free conditions in University of Oklahoma Health Sciences (OUHS) facilities approved by the American Association for Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care and in compliance with all regulations supplied by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Department of Health and Human Services, and National Institutes of Health. The animal use protocol 23-050 was reviewed and approved by the OUHS Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC).

### Biodistribution

Hep3B cells were cultured as described previously. Cells were suspended in ice-cold PBS and injected into the flank of male and female athymic nude mice (107 per animal) to form subcutaneous tumors. The cumulative tumor take rate was 67%. When tumors reached a volume threshold of 300 mm3 ( V = l w 2 2 , l = tumor length, w = tumor width as measured by calipers), animals were randomized to receive one tail vein injection of DiR NSVs or DiR AuNSVs (0.5 mg/kg; n = 3 DiR NSV, n = 5 DiR AuNSV). Animals were imaged using an IVIS Spectrum In Vivo Imaging System before and periodically after injection (10 min, 6 hours, 1 day, 2 days, 3 days, 4 days, and 5 days). After 5 days, animals were euthanized and the organs were imaged ex vivo to determine biodistribution from DiR fluorescence intensity. The heart was included as a negative control. Images were analyzed using Living Image Software.7 per animal) to form subcutaneous tumors. The cumulative tumor take rate was 67%. When tumors reached a volume threshold of 300 mm3 ( , V=lw22l = tumor length, w = tumor width as measured by calipers), animals were randomized to receive one tail vein injection of DiR NSVs or DiR AuNSVs (0.5 mg/kg; n = 3 DiR NSV, n = 5 DiR AuNSV). Animals were imaged using an IVIS Spectrum In Vivo Imaging System before and periodically after injection (10 min, 6 hours, 1 day, 2 days, 3 days, 4 days, and 5 days). After 5 days, animals were euthanized and the organs were imaged ex vivo to determine biodistribution from DiR fluorescence intensity. The heart was included as a negative control. Images were analyzed using Living Image Software.

### Hep3B tumor growth study

Hep3B subcutaneous tumor models were developed as described above. Equal numbers of male and female mice were randomly assigned to control and treatment groups (saline control, AuNSV control, p53 NSV, or p53 AuNSV; n = 8 per group). The cumulative tumor take rate was 75%. Treatment commenced upon a tumor volume threshold of 100 mm3 ( V = l w 2 2 , l = tumor length, w = tumor width as measured by calipers). Animals received thrice weekly injections (eight total) of p53 mRNA (0.5 mg/kg) or equivalent controls, and tumor volume was measured every other day. Animals were euthanized when they met IACUC-mandated endpoints earlier (tumor volume > 1000 mm3, tumor diameter > 1.5 cm, or quality of life standards). The study was concluded, and all remaining animals were euthanized when any group dropped below 20% survival (day 26 following the initial injection). Tissues were collected and tumor mass was recorded before preservation and then split for storage either at −80°C or in 10% neutral buffered formalin. Sectioning, hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining, immunohistochemistry, and downstream biomolecular assays were performed by the Stephenson Cancer Center Tissue Pathology Research and Biospecimen Shared Resource using standard protocols. Prepared tissue slides were imaged using a Nikon Eclipse NI-U microscope (Nikon, Tokyo, Japan) in a blinded fashion.n = 8 per group). The cumulative tumor take rate was 75%. Treatment commenced upon a tumor volume threshold of 100 mm3 ( , V=lw22l = tumor length, w = tumor width as measured by calipers). Animals received thrice weekly injections (eight total) of p53 mRNA (0.5 mg/kg) or equivalent controls, and tumor volume was measured every other day. Animals were euthanized when they met IACUC-mandated endpoints earlier (tumor volume > 1000 mm3, tumor diameter > 1.5 cm, or quality of life standards). The study was concluded, and all remaining animals were euthanized when any group dropped below 20% survival (day 26 following the initial injection). Tissues were collected and tumor mass was recorded before preservation and then split for storage either at −80°C or in 10% neutral buffered formalin. Sectioning, hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining, immunohistochemistry, and downstream biomolecular assays were performed by the Stephenson Cancer Center Tissue Pathology Research and Biospecimen Shared Resource using standard protocols. Prepared tissue slides were imaged using a Nikon Eclipse NI-U microscope (Nikon, Tokyo, Japan) in a blinded fashion.

### Luciferase stable ID8-p53(−/−) cells

ID8-p53(−/−) cells were obtained from I. McNeish (Imperial College London). Stable overexpression of luciferase (Luc) was achieved through lentiviral transduction using the pLenti CMV Puro LUC (w168-1), which was a gift from E. Campeau and P. Kaufman (Addgene plasmid #17477; [http://n2t.net/addgene:17477](http://n2t.net/addgene:17477); RRID:Addgene_17477) (g for 15 min) to remove cellular debris. The viral particles were then concentrated using PEG 8000 precipitation, washed once in PBS, and then dissolved in complete medium. The viral particles were then used to transduce ID8-p53(−/−) cells for 72 hours. Finally, puromycin (2 μg/ml) was applied to select for transduced cells, and luciferase expression was confirmed via a luciferase assay.[http://n2t.net/addgene:17477](http://n2t.net/addgene:17477)48g for 15 min) to remove cellular debris. The viral particles were then concentrated using PEG 8000 precipitation, washed once in PBS, and then dissolved in complete medium. The viral particles were then used to transduce ID8-p53(−/−) cells for 72 hours. Finally, puromycin (2 μg/ml) was applied to select for transduced cells, and luciferase expression was confirmed via a luciferase assay.

### ID8-p53(−/−)-Luc intraperitoneal model study

ID8-p53(−/−)-Luc cells were resuspended in ice-cold PBS, counted, and injected into the intraperitoneal cavity of female C57BL/6 albino mice (107 cells per mouse). Albino C57BL/6 mice were selected because the lack of pigmentation facilitates bioluminescence imaging (d-luciferin sodium salt (100 μl, 30 mg/ml in PBS). On day 14, the animals were randomized into four groups [saline control, AuNSV control, p53 NSV (0.5 mg/kg), or p53 AuNSV (0.5 mg/kg)] and received their first of eight intraperitoneal injections (3× per week). The animals were monitored at least every other day for weight and body condition. On day 42, ongoing therapy of one injection per week was initiated. When an animal met endpoint criteria (7 cells per mouse). Albino C57BL/6 mice were selected because the lack of pigmentation facilitates bioluminescence imaging (49d-luciferin sodium salt (100 μl, 30 mg/ml in PBS). On day 14, the animals were randomized into four groups [saline control, AuNSV control, p53 NSV (0.5 mg/kg), or p53 AuNSV (0.5 mg/kg)] and received their first of eight intraperitoneal injections (3× per week). The animals were monitored at least every other day for weight and body condition. On day 42, ongoing therapy of one injection per week was initiated. When an animal met endpoint criteria (25

### ID8-p53(−/−)-Luc model ascites processing

Post-euthanasia, ascites was immediately collected from the abdominal cavity immediately using a 1-ml syringe and kept on ice while animal blood was collected via cardiac puncture. Aliquots of whole blood samples collected via cardiac puncture and bloody ascites (<200 μl) were stored in EDTA-coated tubes and run on a hematology analyzer. The remaining ascites was spun down (300g for 5 min at 4°C) to separate cells and spheroids from the supernatant, which was stored at −80°C. The cell pellet was resuspended in 1× red blood cell lysis buffer, incubated at room temperature for 5 min, and spun down (300g for 5 min at 4°C) to remove erythrocytes. This was repeated two to four times until the supernatant was transparent, and then the cells and spheroids were resuspended in 1-ml FBS and passed through a 40-μm cell strainer to isolate single cells. The single cells were counted and frozen with 10% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) until the end of the study. The cell strainer was then inverted, and 1 ml of FBS was used to backflush and resuspend the spheroids. A 500-μl aliquot of spheroid solution was loaded into a 24-well plate, and the spheroids were imaged using an inverted Olympus microscope. After imaging, the spheroids were removed from the plate, washed once in PBS, and fixed in 4% PFA in PBS for 20 min at room temperature on a rotator. Spheroids were then dispersed in 1.5% agarose for sectioning and staining in the Stephenson Cancer Center Tissue Pathology and Biospecimen Shared Resource using standard protocols.g for 5 min at 4°C) to separate cells and spheroids from the supernatant, which was stored at −80°C. The cell pellet was resuspended in 1× red blood cell lysis buffer, incubated at room temperature for 5 min, and spun down (300g for 5 min at 4°C) to remove erythrocytes. This was repeated two to four times until the supernatant was transparent, and then the cells and spheroids were resuspended in 1-ml FBS and passed through a 40-μm cell strainer to isolate single cells. The single cells were counted and frozen with 10% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) until the end of the study. The cell strainer was then inverted, and 1 ml of FBS was used to backflush and resuspend the spheroids. A 500-μl aliquot of spheroid solution was loaded into a 24-well plate, and the spheroids were imaged using an inverted Olympus microscope. After imaging, the spheroids were removed from the plate, washed once in PBS, and fixed in 4% PFA in PBS for 20 min at room temperature on a rotator. Spheroids were then dispersed in 1.5% agarose for sectioning and staining in the Stephenson Cancer Center Tissue Pathology and Biospecimen Shared Resource using standard protocols.

### ID8-p53(−/−)-Luc flow cytometry on ascites cells

Cells isolated from the ID8 model ascites were analyzed by flow cytometry. Cells were thawed and centrifuged to remove DMSO before resuspension in FBS. The revived cells were counted, transferred to fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) tubes, washed once in PBS, and spun down (1200 rpm, 5 min at 4°C). The cells were resuspended in 100 μl of Zombie Aqua (1:1000 dilution in PBS) and incubated at room temperature for 15 min in the dark. Cells were then washed in FACS buffer [1× PBS + 2% newborn calf serum (NCS) and 0.1% NaN3], resuspended in 25 μl of Fc block (1:100 dilution in FACS buffer), and incubated on ice for 5 min in the dark. Upon completion of blocking, 45 μl of the antibody cocktail was added and incubated for 30 min on ice in the dark. Cells were then washed in 2 ml of FACS buffer and resuspended in 100 μl of 3% PFA in PBS to fix cells. After 10 min, the cells were spun down (1700 rpm, 5 min at 4°C), resuspended in 200 μl of FACS buffer, and stored at 4°C overnight until they were run on a Cytek Aurora spectral flow cytometer (Cytek Biosciences) with antibody-stained beads used as channel controls and heat-killed cells (65°C for 10 min) as Zombie Aqua controls. Unmixed samples were analyzed using FlowJo. Ascites not collected within 15 min of animal death and samples with fewer than 600,000 cells quantified by flow were excluded from the analysis. Cell population abundance was calculated by multiplying the total number of cells isolated from the ascites by the proportion of cells as a fraction of live from flow analysis.3], resuspended in 25 μl of Fc block (1:100 dilution in FACS buffer), and incubated on ice for 5 min in the dark. Upon completion of blocking, 45 μl of the antibody cocktail was added and incubated for 30 min on ice in the dark. Cells were then washed in 2 ml of FACS buffer and resuspended in 100 μl of 3% PFA in PBS to fix cells. After 10 min, the cells were spun down (1700 rpm, 5 min at 4°C), resuspended in 200 μl of FACS buffer, and stored at 4°C overnight until they were run on a Cytek Aurora spectral flow cytometer (Cytek Biosciences) with antibody-stained beads used as channel controls and heat-killed cells (65°C for 10 min) as Zombie Aqua controls. Unmixed samples were analyzed using FlowJo. Ascites not collected within 15 min of animal death and samples with fewer than 600,000 cells quantified by flow were excluded from the analysis. Cell population abundance was calculated by multiplying the total number of cells isolated from the ascites by the proportion of cells as a fraction of live from flow analysis.

### AuNSV uptake rate assay

AuNSV uptake rate was measured using flow cytometry. TOV-112D cells were seeded overnight into six-well plates (3 × 105 cells per well). Cells were treated with complete medium containing 5 μg/ml (lipid mixture basis) equivalent of NBD-labeled NSVs or AuNSVs. At varying time points (30 min or 2 hours), the cells were washed 3× in ice-cold PBS and lifted with 0.25% trypsin. Cells were washed 1× in ice-cold PBS and kept on ice until being run on the FACSCelesta instrument. After the initial run, cell samples were stained with 4% trypan blue (diluted 1:5 v/v) to quench surface fluorescence and allow differentiation between surface-associated and cell-endocytosed nanoparticles. Surface-quenched samples were run on FACSCelesta as before, and fluorescence was analyzed using FlowJo.5 cells per well). Cells were treated with complete medium containing 5 μg/ml (lipid mixture basis) equivalent of NBD-labeled NSVs or AuNSVs. At varying time points (30 min or 2 hours), the cells were washed 3× in ice-cold PBS and lifted with 0.25% trypsin. Cells were washed 1× in ice-cold PBS and kept on ice until being run on the FACSCelesta instrument. After the initial run, cell samples were stained with 4% trypan blue (diluted 1:5 v/v) to quench surface fluorescence and allow differentiation between surface-associated and cell-endocytosed nanoparticles. Surface-quenched samples were run on FACSCelesta as before, and fluorescence was analyzed using FlowJo.

### AuNSV uptake pathway assay

Uptake pathways were assessed using fluorescence microscopy. TOV-112D (WT and Cav-1 KD), OVCAR8, Hep3B, and OVCAR5 cells were seeded in 24-well plates on 12-mm coverslips (25,000 to 50,000 cells per well; OVCAR5 and OVCAR8 performed using 18-mm coverslips in 12-well plates at 75,000 cells per well). The next day, cells were pretreated for 30 min with inhibitors in serum-free medium: CPZ (10 μg/ml), MβCD (5 mM), filipin (5 μg/ml), 5-(N-ethyl-N-isopropyl)amiloride (EIPA; 0.025 mM), or sodium azide (NaN3; 20 mM). After pretreatment, serum-free medium was replaced with complete medium containing 5 μg/ml equivalent of Cy5-labeled NSVs or AuNSVs. Treatment was carried out for 30 min or 2 hours when cells were fixed and mounted according to standard protocol. Cells were imaged at 64× (five images per sample) with an Axio Z1 microscope, and images were quantified using an ImageJ FIJI script.N-ethyl-N-isopropyl)amiloride (EIPA; 0.025 mM), or sodium azide (NaN3; 20 mM). After pretreatment, serum-free medium was replaced with complete medium containing 5 μg/ml equivalent of Cy5-labeled NSVs or AuNSVs. Treatment was carried out for 30 min or 2 hours when cells were fixed and mounted according to standard protocol. Cells were imaged at 64× (five images per sample) with an Axio Z1 microscope, and images were quantified using an ImageJ FIJI script.

### KD of Cav-1 in TOV-112D cell line

Stable KD of Cav-1 was performed using lentiviral-mediated transduction of shRNA. Plko-based shRNA (TRCN0000007999; region: 3′ untranslated region) and a nontargeted shRNA control were purchased (Sigma-Aldrich) and transfected into HEK-293 cells along with psPAX2 and pMD2.G and incubated for 48 hours. The culture medium containing replication-deficient lentiviral particles was removed and centrifuged (2000g for 15 min) to remove cellular debris. The viral particles were then concentrated using PEG 8000 precipitation, washed once in PBS, and then dissolved in complete RPMI medium. TOV-112D cells were treated with lentiviral-containing medium supplemented with polybrene for 72 hours. The cells were finally subjected to puromycin treatment (2 μg/ml), and Cav-1 KD in the heterogeneous population was verified by Western blot.g for 15 min) to remove cellular debris. The viral particles were then concentrated using PEG 8000 precipitation, washed once in PBS, and then dissolved in complete RPMI medium. TOV-112D cells were treated with lentiviral-containing medium supplemented with polybrene for 72 hours. The cells were finally subjected to puromycin treatment (2 μg/ml), and Cav-1 KD in the heterogeneous population was verified by Western blot.

### Calcein endosomal escape assay

NSVs and AuNSVs were synthesized encapsulating calcein (25:1 lipid:calcein w/w) and labeled with Cy5-PE (25:1 lipid:Cy5-PE w/w) by incorporating the fluorophores in the ethanol stream in the described AuNSV synthesis process. Dequenched calcein fluorescence was measured by disrupting calcein-loaded NSVs and AuNSVs with a solution of 4% Triton X-100. Cells were cultured in 10-cm dishes until reaching 40% confluence, and then Cy5 calcein NSVs or Cy5 calcein AuNSVs were added directly to the medium at a calcein concentration of 0.03 μg/ml. Cells were incubated for 24 hours and subsequently washed 1× in PBS and lifted with a 0.25% trypsin solution. Lifted cells were washed 1× in PBS and then fixed in 100 μl of 4% PFA in PBS for 15 min on ice in the dark. The fixed cells were then washed 1× in PBS and stored at 4°C until they were analyzed on a BD FACSCelesta Cell Analyzer to collect fluorescence and scatter data, with data interpretation and graph production completed with FlowJo.

### Cy5 delivery and LysoTracker colocalization assay

TOV-112D cells (WT and Cav-1 KD) were seeded on 12-mm coverslips in 24-well plates at a density of 25,000 cells per well. Cells were treated with complete medium containing Cy5 GFP NSVs or Cy5 GFP AuNSVs (0.5 μg/ml). After 23.5 hours, the nanoparticle-containing medium was replaced with medium containing 50 nM LysoTracker Red. After 30 min of LysoTracker exposure, cells were mounted and imaged as described above. Cy5 signal was quantified for all images and normalized to uptake of Cy5 GFP NSVs in TOV-112D WT cells for relative uptake quantification. Colocalization was calculated in TOV-112D WT cells and accomplished using an ImageJ FIJI script operating the inbuilt function EZColocalization to calculate the Pearson correlation coefficient (PCC) and two Mander’s coefficients (M1 and M2).

### AuNP release assay

AuNSVs were made and stored at 4°C without sucrose stabilization. In a 96-well plate, 50-μl aliquots of AuNSVs were placed into each well along with 50 μl of either water, 4 mM GSH, or 40 mM GSH. The absorbance spectra of each well were measured on a plate reader, and then wells were then topped with 100 μl of water or 1.5 M NaCl to bring the final GSH concentrations to 1 and 10 mM, respectively. The plate was incubated at 37°C in the plate reader, and absorbance measurements were taken periodically for the next hour. Spectra were plotted over time, and the wells were photographed after 2 hours for visual confirmation of AuNP aggregation.

### AuNP association assays

TOV-112D cells were cultured as previously described and lysed in Pierce IP Lysis buffer containing 1× protease inhibitor cocktail for 15 min on ice. Cell debris was removed with centrifugation at 12,500 rpm for 5 min, and protein concentration was determined using a Pierce BCA assay. AuNP and PEGylated AuNP samples were loaded into 1.5-ml microcentrifuge tubes (50 μg each) and spun down (10,000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C), and all but 50 μl of supernatant was removed. Next, 25 μg of protein lysate was added to each tube. Samples were incubated for 1 hour at room temperature on a rotator to allow for protein corona formation. Corona composition was assessed by spinning down the AuNPs (12,500 rpm, 10 min at 4°C) and separating the pellets from supernatants. Each pellet was resuspended in 20 μl of IP Lysis buffer and then mixed with loading buffer, heated, and then loaded onto 12% SDS-PAGE gels (5 μg of lysate input, total pellet fractions, 5 μg of supernatants). Immunoblotting was carried out as previously described with primary antibodies for α-tubulin (1:10,000), Rab7 (1:1000), and PP2Ac (1:1000).

Heparin and BME inhibition pulldown assays were performed in a similar manner. TOV-112D lysates (25 μg) were incubated with heparin sodium salt (10 μl, 0.1 mg/ml in nanopure water) or BME (25 μl of BME, 2%) for 5 min at room temperature on a rotator. Meanwhile, AuNPs were spun down (10,000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C) and the supernatant was removed, leaving 50 μl along with the pellet (50 μg). AuNPs and treated lysates were incubated at room temperature on the rotator (1 hour for heparin, 10 min for BME) and were then separated from the supernatant by centrifugation (12,500 rpm for 10 min at 4°C) and processed by Western blot as before.

Pulldown inhibition with AuNSVs was conducted analogously. TOV-112D immunoprecipitation (IP) lysates (100 μg) were incubated with heparin (10 μl of 10 mg/ml) or BME (4 μl of 0.1%) for 5 min at room temperature. AuNSVs (not cryostabilize, stored at 4°C) containing 25 μg of AuNPs were then added to the inhibitor-treated lysates and incubated at room temperature on the rotator for 1 hour. AuNSVs were separated from the supernatant with centrifugation (12,500 rpm for 5 min at 4°C), resuspended in 20 μl of IP lysis buffer, and processed as described above using 10 μg of lysate for input and supernatants.

### PP2A activation assay

PP2A activity was measured using a PP2A Immunoprecipitation Phosphatase Assay Kit (Sigma-Aldrich, catalog 17-313). TOV-112D cells were cultured in 10-cm dishes until 50% confluency, and then the culture medium was replaced with complete medium containing the vehicle equivalent of mRNA-loaded NSVs or AuNSVs (1 μg/ml). Cells were treated for 24 hours, washed 3× in ice-cold TBS, and lysed for 15 min on ice in IP Lysis buffer containing 1× protease inhibitor cocktail. The plates were scraped and cell debris was pelleted by centrifuging at 12,500 rpm for 5 min. Protein concentration was determined using BCA assay. PP2A pulldown was performed according to protocol instructions using 500 μg of fresh protein, 25 μl of protein A–agarose, and 4 μl of anti-PP2Ac antibody for 30 min at 4°C on a rotator. Beads were washed and phosphatase reactions were carried out for 10 min at room temperature on a rotator, with 30 μl of phosphopeptide and 70 μl of assay buffer in each tube. Samples were then spun down, and 25 μl was added to each well on a 96-well plate with 75 μl of malachite green solution. The reaction was read at 650 nm after 10-min incubation at room temperature with relative phosphatase activity normalized to NSV-treated cells.

### Western blotting for p-Cav-1

TOV-112D cells were cultured in 10-cm dishes until achieving 50% confluence. The vehicle equivalent NSVs and AuNSVs (not cryostabilize, stored at 4°C) of mRNA (0.25 μg/ml) were then added directly to the medium and incubated for 24 hours. After treatment, cells were lysed in RIPA Lysis buffer containing 1× Halt protease + phosphatase inhibitor cocktail for 15 min on ice. Cell debris was removed with centrifugation at 12,500 rpm for 5 min, and protein concentration was determined using a Pierce BCA assay. Fresh lysates were loaded onto 12% SDS-PAGE gels (20 to 45 μg of lysate), and immunoblotting was carried out as previously described with primary antibodies for GAPDH (1:5000), Cav-1 (1:1000), and p-Cav-1 (1:1000).

### Rab7 activation assay

Rab7 activation was quantified following a protocol published by the Li laboratory (5050

### Statistics

Data analysis was performed in the most recent version of GraphPad Prism 10. All results are calculated and presented as mean ± SE from at least three replicates unless otherwise stated. Outliers were calculated using the robust regression and outlier removal (ROUT) method in GraphPad Prism with a Q value of 1%. The statistical significance of differences between two independent and normally distributed groups was determined using an unpaired t test with Welch’s correction. Paired t tests were used for experiments comparing one experimental group to one control group, where the comparison group value was normalized to 1. Significant relationships between all groups in an experiment were calculated using ordinary one-way or two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. Differences between two treatments along several parameters were calculated using two-way ANOVA with Šidák’s multiple comparisons test. Significance is designated by P values as indicated in figures and/or legends. The number of replicates analyzed for each experiment can be found in tables S11 to S26.Q value of 1%. The statistical significance of differences between two independent and normally distributed groups was determined using an unpaired t test with Welch’s correction. Paired t tests were used for experiments comparing one experimental group to one control group, where the comparison group value was normalized to 1. Significant relationships between all groups in an experiment were calculated using ordinary one-way or two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. Differences between two treatments along several parameters were calculated using two-way ANOVA with Šidák’s multiple comparisons test. Significance is designated by P values as indicated in figures and/or legends. The number of replicates analyzed for each experiment can be found in tables S11 to S26.

---

**Fig. 1.**: Design and efficacy of AuNSVs.

(A) Synthesis process and experimental design. Created in BioRender. Mukherjee, P. (2025) [https://BioRender.com/8ig1ujh](https://BioRender.com/8ig1ujh). (B) Characteristic flow cytometry histograms of TOV-112D cells treated for 24 hours with varying concentrations of GFP mRNA delivered via NSV or AuNSV. (C) Quantification of flow experiments in (B). Significance determined using two-way ANOVA with Šídák’s multiple comparisons test. Y axis has been rescaled. (D) Characteristic microscopy images of cancer cell lines treated with GFP NSVs or GFP AuNSVs (24 hours, 0.25 μg/ml). Contrast enhanced for publication. (E) Quantification of images in (D). Each data point represents one image, with five images taken per replicate. Significance determined using two-way ANOVA with Šídák’s multiple comparisons test. Y axis has been rescaled. (F) Biodistribution study of DiR-loaded NSVs and AuNSVs in Hep3B tumor-bearing mice. (G) Ex vivo imaging of animals treated with DiR NSVs and AuNSVs after 5 days. (H and I) Quantification of tumor DiR signal as a ratio to total DiR signal and as a ratio to liver DiR signal from (G). Significance determined using an unpaired one-tailed t test with Welch’s correction (n = 3 for DiR NSV, n = 5 for DiR AuNSV). Data presented as mean ± SEM from a minimum of three replicates unless otherwise designated. The number of replicates analyzed for each chart is shown in table S11.A) Synthesis process and experimental design. Created in BioRender. Mukherjee, P. (2025) [https://BioRender.com/8ig1ujh](https://BioRender.com/8ig1ujh)B) Characteristic flow cytometry histograms of TOV-112D cells treated for 24 hours with varying concentrations of GFP mRNA delivered via NSV or AuNSV. (C) Quantification of flow experiments in (B). Significance determined using two-way ANOVA with Šídák’s multiple comparisons test. Y axis has been rescaled. (D) Characteristic microscopy images of cancer cell lines treated with GFP NSVs or GFP AuNSVs (24 hours, 0.25 μg/ml). Contrast enhanced for publication. (E) Quantification of images in (D). Each data point represents one image, with five images taken per replicate. Significance determined using two-way ANOVA with Šídák’s multiple comparisons test. Y axis has been rescaled. (F) Biodistribution study of DiR-loaded NSVs and AuNSVs in Hep3B tumor-bearing mice. (G) Ex vivo imaging of animals treated with DiR NSVs and AuNSVs after 5 days. (H and I) Quantification of tumor DiR signal as a ratio to total DiR signal and as a ratio to liver DiR signal from (G). Significance determined using an unpaired one-tailed t test with Welch’s correction (n = 3 for DiR NSV, n = 5 for DiR AuNSV). Data presented as mean ± SEM from a minimum of three replicates unless otherwise designated. The number of replicates analyzed for each chart is shown in table S11.

*(image omitted)*

**Fig. 2.**: p53 AuNSVs initiate apoptosis in p53-null Hep3B cancer cells.

(A) Normalized TP53 mRNA expression in Hep3B cells after 24-hour treatment with p53 mRNA (1 μg/ml) as delivered by NSVs (p53 NSVs) and AuNSVs (p53 AuNSVs). Significance determined using a paired two-tailed t test. (B) Western blot of p53 in Hep3B cells treated for 24 hours with p53 mRNA (1 μg/ml). (C) IF micrographs of Hep3B cells after 24-hour treatment with p53 mRNA (1 μg/ml). Scale bar, 25 μm. (D) Quantification of Hep3B p53 IF images from (C). Significance determined using an unpaired two-tailed t test with Welch’s correction. (E) Normalized BrdU incorporation in Hep3B cells treated with p53 mRNA (1 μg/ml) for 24 hours. Significance determined using one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. (F) Characteristic cell cycle histograms of Hep3B cells treated with p53 mRNA (0.25 μg/ml) for 48 hours. (G) Quantification of (F). (H) Normalized protein expression of apoptotic and cell cycle markers in Hep3B cells treated for 24 hours with p53 mRNA (1 μg/ml). Significance determined using two-way ANOVA followed by Šídák’s multiple comparisons test. (I) Representative low-magnification images of TUNEL+ Hep3B cells after 24 hours of treatment with p53 mRNA (1 μg/ml). Scale bar, 100 μm. (J) TUNEL assay quantification. Significance determined using one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. (K) Representative colony formation assay for Hep3B cells treated for 10 days with p53 NSVs or p53 AuNSVs (0.1 μg/ml). (L) Quantification of (K). Significance determined using ordinary one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. (M) Histogram of normalized colony area from (K). All data represented as mean ± SEM. The number of replicates analyzed for each chart is shown in table S12.A) Normalized TP53 mRNA expression in Hep3B cells after 24-hour treatment with p53 mRNA (1 μg/ml) as delivered by NSVs (p53 NSVs) and AuNSVs (p53 AuNSVs). Significance determined using a paired two-tailed t test. (B) Western blot of p53 in Hep3B cells treated for 24 hours with p53 mRNA (1 μg/ml). (C) IF micrographs of Hep3B cells after 24-hour treatment with p53 mRNA (1 μg/ml). Scale bar, 25 μm. (D) Quantification of Hep3B p53 IF images from (C). Significance determined using an unpaired two-tailed t test with Welch’s correction. (E) Normalized BrdU incorporation in Hep3B cells treated with p53 mRNA (1 μg/ml) for 24 hours. Significance determined using one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. (F) Characteristic cell cycle histograms of Hep3B cells treated with p53 mRNA (0.25 μg/ml) for 48 hours. (G) Quantification of (F). (H) Normalized protein expression of apoptotic and cell cycle markers in Hep3B cells treated for 24 hours with p53 mRNA (1 μg/ml). Significance determined using two-way ANOVA followed by Šídák’s multiple comparisons test. (I) Representative low-magnification images of TUNEL+ Hep3B cells after 24 hours of treatment with p53 mRNA (1 μg/ml). Scale bar, 100 μm. (J) TUNEL assay quantification. Significance determined using one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. (K) Representative colony formation assay for Hep3B cells treated for 10 days with p53 NSVs or p53 AuNSVs (0.1 μg/ml). (L) Quantification of (K). Significance determined using ordinary one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. (M) Histogram of normalized colony area from (K). All data represented as mean ± SEM. The number of replicates analyzed for each chart is shown in table S12.

*(image omitted)*

**Fig. 3.**: p53 AuNSVs inhibit tumor growth in vivo.

(A) Hep3B subcutaneous model study design. Created in BioRender. Mukherjee, P. (2025) [https://BioRender.com/8ig1ujh](https://BioRender.com/8ig1ujh). (B) Growth curves for subcutaneous Hep3B xenograft tumor models. p53 AuNSV treatment (0.5 mg/kg, 3× per week, 8 injections total) showed significantly inhibited tumor growth in comparison to all other groups at end of treatment. Significance determined using two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. (C) Tumor volume at end of treatment period. (D) Survival curves for Hep3B subcutaneous tumor models. Animals were removed from the study when tumors reached 1000 mm3, 1.5 cm diameter, or other humane endpoints were achieved. All remaining animals were euthanized on day 26. Significance determined using log-rank Mantel-Cox tests corrected for multiple comparisons using the Holm-Šídák method with α = 0.05. (E) Tumor mass measured at endpoint. (F) Images of excised tumors. Scale bar, 1 cm. (G) Quantification of normalized p53 immunohistochemical area. Each data point represents one image, with five images taken per animal. Significance determined using a two-tailed t test with Welch’s correction. (H) Quantification of Ki67+ cells per 10× field. Each data point represents one image, with three images taken per animal. (I) Quantification of cleaved caspase-3 signal per 10× field. Each data point represents one image, with three images taken per animal. (J) Quantification of TUNEL-stained tumor sections. Each data point represents one image, with five images taken per animal. (K) Characteristic tumor tissue sections stained for p53, Ki67, cleaved caspase-3, and TUNEL. p53 and TUNEL scale bar, 25 μm; Ki67 and cleaved caspase-3 scale bar, 100 μm. All data presented as mean ± SEM. Significance determined using one- or two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test unless otherwise specified. The number of replicates analyzed for each chart is shown in table S13.A) Hep3B subcutaneous model study design. Created in BioRender. Mukherjee, P. (2025) [https://BioRender.com/8ig1ujh](https://BioRender.com/8ig1ujh)B) Growth curves for subcutaneous Hep3B xenograft tumor models. p53 AuNSV treatment (0.5 mg/kg, 3× per week, 8 injections total) showed significantly inhibited tumor growth in comparison to all other groups at end of treatment. Significance determined using two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. (C) Tumor volume at end of treatment period. (D) Survival curves for Hep3B subcutaneous tumor models. Animals were removed from the study when tumors reached 1000 mm3, 1.5 cm diameter, or other humane endpoints were achieved. All remaining animals were euthanized on day 26. Significance determined using log-rank Mantel-Cox tests corrected for multiple comparisons using the Holm-Šídák method with α = 0.05. (E) Tumor mass measured at endpoint. (F) Images of excised tumors. Scale bar, 1 cm. (G) Quantification of normalized p53 immunohistochemical area. Each data point represents one image, with five images taken per animal. Significance determined using a two-tailed t test with Welch’s correction. (H) Quantification of Ki67+ cells per 10× field. Each data point represents one image, with three images taken per animal. (I) Quantification of cleaved caspase-3 signal per 10× field. Each data point represents one image, with three images taken per animal. (J) Quantification of TUNEL-stained tumor sections. Each data point represents one image, with five images taken per animal. (K) Characteristic tumor tissue sections stained for p53, Ki67, cleaved caspase-3, and TUNEL. p53 and TUNEL scale bar, 25 μm; Ki67 and cleaved caspase-3 scale bar, 100 μm. All data presented as mean ± SEM. Significance determined using one- or two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test unless otherwise specified. The number of replicates analyzed for each chart is shown in table S13.

*(image omitted)*

**Fig. 4.**: p53 AuNSVs inhibit ovarian cancer spheroid formation and peritoneal dissemination.

(A) Western blot of p53 expression in ID8-p53(−/−)-Luc cells with treatment by p53 AuNSVs and controls in vitro. (B) Representative images of in vitro TUNEL apoptosis assay for ID8-p53(−/−)-Luc cells treated with 1 μg/ml equivalent of p53 mRNA. Scale bar, 100 μm. Contrast enhanced for publication. (C) Quantification of images in (B). Each data point represents one image, with five images analyzed for each replicate. (D) ID8-p53(−/−)-Luc IP model study design. Created in BioRender. Mukherjee, P. (2025) [https://BioRender.com/8ig1ujh](https://BioRender.com/8ig1ujh). (E) Survival curve of mice treated with saline, AuNSVs, p53 NSVs, and p53 AuNSVs. (F) Representative images of subdiaphragmatic nodules, peritoneal nodules, and spheroids isolated from ascites. Scale bars, 200 μm (diaphragm H&E images), 100 μm (suspended spheroid images), and 25 μm (spheroid H&E images). (G) Quantification of subdiaphragmatic nodules identified per mouse. (H) Quantification of average normalized spheroid cross section. Five images were taken for each for a minimum of four animals per group. (I) Representative flow cytometry scatterplots of macrophage-like cells in ascites. Gated: Live, CD45+, CD90−, CD19−/CD11b+, Ly6G−/SiglecF−, Ly6C−/low/high. See fig. S8H for gating strategy. (J) Distribution of ascites macrophage-like cells grouped by Ly6C expression. (K) Number of ascites macrophage-like cells with high expression of Ly6C. Unless otherwise noted, significance determined using one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test and P value displayed above compared groups. Data presented as mean ± SEM from a minimum of three replicates. The number of replicates analyzed for each chart is shown in table S14.A) Western blot of p53 expression in ID8-p53(−/−)-Luc cells with treatment by p53 AuNSVs and controls in vitro. (B) Representative images of in vitro TUNEL apoptosis assay for ID8-p53(−/−)-Luc cells treated with 1 μg/ml equivalent of p53 mRNA. Scale bar, 100 μm. Contrast enhanced for publication. (C) Quantification of images in (B). Each data point represents one image, with five images analyzed for each replicate. (D) ID8-p53(−/−)-Luc IP model study design. Created in BioRender. Mukherjee, P. (2025) [https://BioRender.com/8ig1ujh](https://BioRender.com/8ig1ujh)E) Survival curve of mice treated with saline, AuNSVs, p53 NSVs, and p53 AuNSVs. (F) Representative images of subdiaphragmatic nodules, peritoneal nodules, and spheroids isolated from ascites. Scale bars, 200 μm (diaphragm H&E images), 100 μm (suspended spheroid images), and 25 μm (spheroid H&E images). (G) Quantification of subdiaphragmatic nodules identified per mouse. (H) Quantification of average normalized spheroid cross section. Five images were taken for each for a minimum of four animals per group. (I) Representative flow cytometry scatterplots of macrophage-like cells in ascites. Gated: Live, CD45+, CD90−, CD19−/CD11b+, Ly6G−/SiglecF−, Ly6C−/low/high. See fig. S8H for gating strategy. (J) Distribution of ascites macrophage-like cells grouped by Ly6C expression. (K) Number of ascites macrophage-like cells with high expression of Ly6C. Unless otherwise noted, significance determined using one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test and P value displayed above compared groups. Data presented as mean ± SEM from a minimum of three replicates. The number of replicates analyzed for each chart is shown in table S14.

*(image omitted)*

**Fig. 5.**: AuNSVs shift the vector uptake pathway.

(A and B) Flow cytometry histograms and quantification showing time-dependent uptake of NBD-labeled NSVs (NBD NSVs) and AuNP-doped NSVs (AuNSVs) in TOV-112D cells. Surface NBD fluorescence was quenched using trypan blue to ensure that only endocytosed nanoparticles were quantified. Significance determined using a paired two-tailed t test. (C and D) TOV-112D uptake inhibition assay performed with Cy5 NSV and Cy5 AuNSV treatment at 30 min and 2 hours. NI, no inhibitor; CPZ, chlorpromazine, CME inhibitor; M βCD, methyl-β-cyclodextrin, caveolin-mediated endocytosis (CvME) inhibitor; filipin, CvME inhibitor; EIPA, 5-(N-ethyl-N-isopropyl)-amiloride, macropinocytosis (MPC) inhibitor; NaN3, sodium azide, active transport inhibitor. Each data point represents one microscopy image, with five images analyzed for each replicate. Cy5 area was first normalized to DAPI area for each image and subsequently to the uninhibited group for each vector. Significance determined using two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. (E) Normalized uptake of Cy5 NSVs and Cy5 AuNSVs with NI, CPZ, or M β CD pretreatment in four cancer cell lines. All four show a preferential activation of CvME for AuNSV uptake. Each data point represents one image, with five images analyzed for each replicate. Data presented as mean ± SEM from a minimum of three replicates unless otherwise noted. For (C) and (D), only differences between NI, CPZ, M βCD, and filipin groups are shown. The number of replicates analyzed for each chart is shown in table S15.A and B) Flow cytometry histograms and quantification showing time-dependent uptake of NBD-labeled NSVs (NBD NSVs) and AuNP-doped NSVs (AuNSVs) in TOV-112D cells. Surface NBD fluorescence was quenched using trypan blue to ensure that only endocytosed nanoparticles were quantified. Significance determined using a paired two-tailed t test. (C and D) TOV-112D uptake inhibition assay performed with Cy5 NSV and Cy5 AuNSV treatment at 30 min and 2 hours. NI, no inhibitor; CPZ, chlorpromazine, CME inhibitor; M CD, methyl-β-cyclodextrin, caveolin-mediated endocytosis (CvME) inhibitor; filipin, CvME inhibitor; EIPA, 5-(βN-ethyl-N-isopropyl)-amiloride, macropinocytosis (MPC) inhibitor; NaN3, sodium azide, active transport inhibitor. Each data point represents one microscopy image, with five images analyzed for each replicate. Cy5 area was first normalized to DAPI area for each image and subsequently to the uninhibited group for each vector. Significance determined using two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. (E) Normalized uptake of Cy5 NSVs and Cy5 AuNSVs with NI, CPZ, or M CD pretreatment in four cancer cell lines. All four show a preferential activation of CvME for AuNSV uptake. Each data point represents one image, with five images analyzed for each replicate. Data presented as mean ± SEM from a minimum of three replicates unless otherwise noted. For (C) and (D), only differences between NI, CPZ, M βCD, and filipin groups are shown. The number of replicates analyzed for each chart is shown in table S15.β

*(image omitted)*

**Fig. 6.**: KD of Cav-1 supports AuNSV-mediated shift in uptake pathway.

(A) Western blot showing KD of Cav-1 in TOV-112D Cav-1 KD cells. (B) Quantification of Cy5 NSV and Cy5 AuNSV uptake in TOV-112D Cav-1 KD cells after 2 hours. Each data point represents one image, with five images analyzed for each replicate. Significance determined using an unpaired two-tailed t test with Welch’s correction. (C) Uptake inhibition assay performed on TOV-112D Cav-1 KD cells after 2-hour treatment with Cy5 NSVs and Cy5 AuNSVs. Each data point represents one image, with five images analyzed for each replicate. Significance determined using two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. (D) Characteristic images of WT TOV-112D and TOV-112D Cav-1 KD cells treated with Cy5 GFP NSVs and Cy5 GFP AuNSVs for 24 hours. Cy5 displayed as red, GFP not shown. Scale bar, 50 μm. Contrast enhanced for publication. (E) Quantification of images from (D). Each data point represents one image, with five images analyzed for each replicate. Significance determined using two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. Data presented as mean ± SEM from a minimum of three replicates unless otherwise noted. For (C), only differences between NI, CPZ, M βCD, and filipin groups are shown. The number of replicates analyzed for each chart is shown in table S16.A) Western blot showing KD of Cav-1 in TOV-112D Cav-1 KD cells. (B) Quantification of Cy5 NSV and Cy5 AuNSV uptake in TOV-112D Cav-1 KD cells after 2 hours. Each data point represents one image, with five images analyzed for each replicate. Significance determined using an unpaired two-tailed t test with Welch’s correction. (C) Uptake inhibition assay performed on TOV-112D Cav-1 KD cells after 2-hour treatment with Cy5 NSVs and Cy5 AuNSVs. Each data point represents one image, with five images analyzed for each replicate. Significance determined using two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. (D) Characteristic images of WT TOV-112D and TOV-112D Cav-1 KD cells treated with Cy5 GFP NSVs and Cy5 GFP AuNSVs for 24 hours. Cy5 displayed as red, GFP not shown. Scale bar, 50 μm. Contrast enhanced for publication. (E) Quantification of images from (D). Each data point represents one image, with five images analyzed for each replicate. Significance determined using two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. Data presented as mean ± SEM from a minimum of three replicates unless otherwise noted. For (C), only differences between NI, CPZ, M CD, and filipin groups are shown. The number of replicates analyzed for each chart is shown in table S16.β

*(image omitted)*

**Fig. 7.**: AuNSVs promote endosomal escape.

(A) Characteristic flow cytometry plot of dual delivery-endosomal escape assay on TOV-112D cells using Cy5-labeled, calcein-loaded NSVs and AuNSVs (0.03 μg/ml calcein). Calcein is a self-quenching, membrane-impermeable fluorophore routinely used to study endosomal escape as it is detectable only when dequenched and dispersed throughout the cytoplasm. (B) Quantification of flow cytometry plots from (A). Cy5 calcein AuNSVs showed greater endosomal escape than NSVs. Significance determined using an unpaired two-tailed t test with Welch’s correction. (C) Characteristic images of TOV-112D cells treated with Cy5 GFP NSVs or Cy5 GFP AuNSVs (0.5 μg/ml, 24 hours) and stained with LysoTracker. Cy5 displayed as cyan, LysoTracker Red displayed as red, GFP not shown. Scale bar, 25 μm. (D) M1 colocalization coefficient between Cy5 and LysoTracker for (C). Each data point represents one image, with five images analyzed for each replicate. Significance determined using an unpaired, two-tailed t test with Welch’s correction. Data presented as mean ± SEM from a minimum of three replicates unless otherwise noted. The number of replicates analyzed for each chart is shown in table S17.A) Characteristic flow cytometry plot of dual delivery-endosomal escape assay on TOV-112D cells using Cy5-labeled, calcein-loaded NSVs and AuNSVs (0.03 μg/ml calcein). Calcein is a self-quenching, membrane-impermeable fluorophore routinely used to study endosomal escape as it is detectable only when dequenched and dispersed throughout the cytoplasm. (B) Quantification of flow cytometry plots from (A). Cy5 calcein AuNSVs showed greater endosomal escape than NSVs. Significance determined using an unpaired two-tailed t test with Welch’s correction. (C) Characteristic images of TOV-112D cells treated with Cy5 GFP NSVs or Cy5 GFP AuNSVs (0.5 μg/ml, 24 hours) and stained with LysoTracker. Cy5 displayed as cyan, LysoTracker Red displayed as red, GFP not shown. Scale bar, 25 μm. (D) M1 colocalization coefficient between Cy5 and LysoTracker for (C). Each data point represents one image, with five images analyzed for each replicate. Significance determined using an unpaired, two-tailed t test with Welch’s correction. Data presented as mean ± SEM from a minimum of three replicates unless otherwise noted. The number of replicates analyzed for each chart is shown in table S17.

*(image omitted)*

**Fig. 8.**: AuNSVs promote caveolin-mediated uptake and endosomal escape by inhibiting PP2A and Rab7.

(A) Release of AuNPs from AuNSVs in the presence of GSH. Unencapsulated AuNPs aggregate in the presence of concentrated NaCl, resulting in a loss of the characteristic absorbance peak. (B) Western blot of 20-nm AuNP and PEGylated 20-nm AuNP (PEG-AuNP) protein coronas. Both PP2A and Rab7 are enriched in the AuNP protein corona, while PEG-AuNPs show inhibited binding. (C) Pulldown of PP2A and Rab7 using heparin-Sepharose beads. PP2A binds to the heparin bead, while Rab7 does not. (D) Heparin and BME inhibition of AuNP-protein binding. PP2A and α-tubulin show reduced binding to AuNPs in the presence of heparin, while Rab7 binding is uninhibited. Rab7 shows reduced binding to AuNPs in the presence of BME, while PP2A and α-tubulin binding is uninhibited. (E) Pulldown of AuNSVs with pretreatment of water, BME, or heparin (Hep). (F) Normalized PP2A activity in TOV-112D cells treated with NSVs or AuNSVs for 24 hours. (G) Western blot of TOV-112D cells treated with NSVs and AuNSVs for 24 hours shows increased phosphorylation of Cav-1 (Tyr14) with AuNSV treatment. (H) Quantification of RILP-Rab7 pulldown assay with 24-hour AuNP treatment. Active Rab7 was normalized to total Rab7 for each sample. (I) Quantification of RILP-Rab7 pulldown assay with NSV and AuNSV treatment. (J) Representative RILP-Rab7 pulldown assay with 24-hour NSV and AuNSV treatment. Data are represented as mean ± SEM from a minimum of three replicates, and significance is determined using a paired two-tailed t test. The number of replicates analyzed for each chart is shown in table S18.A) Release of AuNPs from AuNSVs in the presence of GSH. Unencapsulated AuNPs aggregate in the presence of concentrated NaCl, resulting in a loss of the characteristic absorbance peak. (B) Western blot of 20-nm AuNP and PEGylated 20-nm AuNP (PEG-AuNP) protein coronas. Both PP2A and Rab7 are enriched in the AuNP protein corona, while PEG-AuNPs show inhibited binding. (C) Pulldown of PP2A and Rab7 using heparin-Sepharose beads. PP2A binds to the heparin bead, while Rab7 does not. (D) Heparin and BME inhibition of AuNP-protein binding. PP2A and α-tubulin show reduced binding to AuNPs in the presence of heparin, while Rab7 binding is uninhibited. Rab7 shows reduced binding to AuNPs in the presence of BME, while PP2A and α-tubulin binding is uninhibited. (E) Pulldown of AuNSVs with pretreatment of water, BME, or heparin (Hep). (F) Normalized PP2A activity in TOV-112D cells treated with NSVs or AuNSVs for 24 hours. (G) Western blot of TOV-112D cells treated with NSVs and AuNSVs for 24 hours shows increased phosphorylation of Cav-1 (Tyr14) with AuNSV treatment. (H) Quantification of RILP-Rab7 pulldown assay with 24-hour AuNP treatment. Active Rab7 was normalized to total Rab7 for each sample. (I) Quantification of RILP-Rab7 pulldown assay with NSV and AuNSV treatment. (J) Representative RILP-Rab7 pulldown assay with 24-hour NSV and AuNSV treatment. Data are represented as mean ± SEM from a minimum of three replicates, and significance is determined using a paired two-tailed t test. The number of replicates analyzed for each chart is shown in table S18.

*(image omitted)*

**Fig. 9.**: Schematic of the iterative delivery mechanism of AuNP-enhanced delivery of mRNA.

AuNSVs initially enter the cell primarily by CME. Upon endosomal escape, AuNPs are released into the cytoplasm and subsequently adsorb and inhibit Rab7 and PP2A. This occurs through Au-thiol and electrostatic binding, respectively, and results in enhanced endosomal escape and preferential activation of CvME. A flood of additional AuNSVs enters the cell by CvME and escapes the endocytic trafficking system, allowing ribosomes to interact with the delivered mRNA and synthesize the protein. Created in BioRender. Mukherjee, P. (2025) [https://BioRender.com/8ig1ujh](https://BioRender.com/8ig1ujh).[https://BioRender.com/8ig1ujh](https://BioRender.com/8ig1ujh)

*(image omitted)*

## Supplementary Materials

- **sciadv.adx0916_sm.pdf**: Supplementary Methods Figs. S1 to S10 Tables S1 to S28 Complete gating tree for ID8 model flow cytometry analysis GST-RILP plasmid sequencing References
