# Sustainable and interpretable heart disease prediction: a clinical decision support approach for biomedical healthcare applications

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-026-37840-0 Journal: Scientific Reports

**Authors:** Kehkashan, Tanzila, Abdelhaq, Maha, Al-Shamayleh, Ahmad Sami, Riaz, Raja Adil, Abdullah, Muhammad, Ahmed, Abdelmuttlib Ibrahim Abdalla, Akhunzada, Adnan

1. Faculty of Computing, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, Johor Bahru, Malaysia
2. Faculty of Information Technology, University of Lahore, Sargodha, Pakistan
3. Department of Information Technology, College of Computer and Information Sciences, Princess Nourah Bint Abdulrahman University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
4. Department of Data Science and Artificial Intelligence, Faculty of Information Technology, Al-Ahliyya Amman University, Amman, Jordan
5. Computer Science Department, Faculty of Computer Science and Information Technology, Omdurman Islamic University, Omdurman, Sudan
6. Department of Data and Cybersecurity, College of Computing and IT, University of Doha for Science and Technology, Doha, Qatar

## Abstract

Cardiovascular disorders cause approximately 18 million deaths annually worldwide, underscoring the urgent need for precise and rapid diagnosis. Conventional machine learning does not automate feature extraction and does not capture complex non-linear relationships in high-dimensional medical data during cardiodiagnostic predictions, not to mention current techniques also lack interpretability and transparency and thus are not useful for building clinically trusted AI-powered prediction tools for personalized biomedicine and healthcare. To fill this gap, we propose an interpretable Convolutional Neural Network (1D CNN) model for cardiodiagnostic predictions that integrates automated feature extraction and explains AI. Our approach uses a 1D CNN model composed of two convolutional layers (with 64 and 128 filters). The CNN will be trained on Cleveland Heart Disease Dataset (Kaggle) (303 instances, 14 attributes) and will undergo evaluation using accuracy, precision, recall , F1 score, and LIME-SHAP interpretability analyses. The results given attest to the remarkable results, where the model achieved 98.05% percent accuracy, 100% percent precision, 96.12% percent recall, 98.02% percent F1 score, 0.963 MCC, and 0.961 Kappa coefficient. Our results exceed several of the more modern techniques offered in the literature. LIME and SHAP analyses reveal how specific features (sex, number of major vessels, thalassemia status) drive model predictions, enhancing interpretability and aligning with clinical understanding of cardiac risk factors essential for precision medicine. This research demonstrates the potential for interpretable deep learning to transform cardiovascular diagnostics through enhanced clinical decision support systems and trustworthy AI implementation in precision medicine.

## Abstract

Cardiovascular disorders cause approximately 18 million deaths annually worldwide, underscoring the urgent need for precise and rapid diagnosis. Conventional machine learning does not automate feature extraction and does not capture complex non-linear relationships in high-dimensional medical data during cardiodiagnostic predictions, not to mention current techniques also lack interpretability and transparency and thus are not useful for building clinically trusted AI-powered prediction tools for personalized biomedicine and healthcare. To fill this gap, we propose an interpretable Convolutional Neural Network (1D CNN) model for cardiodiagnostic predictions that integrates automated feature extraction and explains AI. Our approach uses a 1D CNN model composed of two convolutional layers (with 64 and 128 filters). The CNN will be trained on Cleveland Heart Disease Dataset (Kaggle) (303 instances, 14 attributes) and will undergo evaluation using accuracy, precision, recall , F1 score, and LIME-SHAP interpretability analyses. The results given attest to the remarkable results, where the model achieved 98.05% percent accuracy, 100% percent precision, 96.12% percent recall, 98.02% percent F1 score, 0.963 MCC, and 0.961 Kappa coefficient. Our results exceed several of the more modern techniques offered in the literature. LIME and SHAP analyses reveal how specific features (sex, number of major vessels, thalassemia status) drive model predictions, enhancing interpretability and aligning with clinical understanding of cardiac risk factors essential for precision medicine. This research demonstrates the potential for interpretable deep learning to transform cardiovascular diagnostics through enhanced clinical decision support systems and trustworthy AI implementation in precision medicine.

## Data availability

This research utilizes a publicly accessible dataset available on Kaggle (https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/johnsmith88/heartdisease- dataset). It includes a subset of the Cleveland Heart Disease database, regularly featured in research concentrating on cardiovascular disease detection, which enables the reproducibility and comparison of results across multiple studies.

## Acknowledgements

Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University Researchers Supporting Project Number (PNURSP2026R97), Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

## Funding

This research was supported by Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University Researchers Supporting Project Number (PNURSP2026R97), Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

## Author information

### Authors and Affiliations

Authors Tanzila Kehkashan [View author publications](/search?author=Tanzila%20Kehkashan) Search author on: [PubMed](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=search&term=Tanzila%20Kehkashan) [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.co.uk/scholar?as_q=&num=10&btnG=Search+Scholar&as_epq=&as_oq=&as_eq=&as_occt=any&as_sauthors=%22Tanzila%20Kehkashan%22&as_publication=&as_ylo=&as_yhi=&as_allsubj=all&hl=en) Maha Abdelhaq [View author publications](/search?author=Maha%20Abdelhaq) Search author on: [PubMed](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=search&term=Maha%20Abdelhaq) [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.co.uk/scholar?as_q=&num=10&btnG=Search+Scholar&as_epq=&as_oq=&as_eq=&as_occt=any&as_sauthors=%22Maha%20Abdelhaq%22&as_publication=&as_ylo=&as_yhi=&as_allsubj=all&hl=en) Ahmad Sami Al-Shamayleh [View author publications](/search?author=Ahmad%20Sami%20Al-Shamayleh) Search author on: [PubMed](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=search&term=Ahmad%20Sami%20Al-Shamayleh) [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.co.uk/scholar?as_q=&num=10&btnG=Search+Scholar&as_epq=&as_oq=&as_eq=&as_occt=any&as_sauthors=%22Ahmad%20Sami%20Al-Shamayleh%22&as_publication=&as_ylo=&as_yhi=&as_allsubj=all&hl=en) Raja Adil Riaz [View author publications](/search?author=Raja%20Adil%20Riaz) Search author on: [PubMed](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=search&term=Raja%20Adil%20Riaz) [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.co.uk/scholar?as_q=&num=10&btnG=Search+Scholar&as_epq=&as_oq=&as_eq=&as_occt=any&as_sauthors=%22Raja%20Adil%20Riaz%22&as_publication=&as_ylo=&as_yhi=&as_allsubj=all&hl=en) Muhammad Abdullah [View author publications](/search?author=Muhammad%20Abdullah) Search author on: [PubMed](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=search&term=Muhammad%20Abdullah) [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.co.uk/scholar?as_q=&num=10&btnG=Search+Scholar&as_epq=&as_oq=&as_eq=&as_occt=any&as_sauthors=%22Muhammad%20Abdullah%22&as_publication=&as_ylo=&as_yhi=&as_allsubj=all&hl=en) Abdelmuttlib Ibrahim Abdalla Ahmed [View author publications](/search?author=Abdelmuttlib%20Ibrahim%20Abdalla%20Ahmed) Search author on: [PubMed](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=search&term=Abdelmuttlib%20Ibrahim%20Abdalla%20Ahmed) [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.co.uk/scholar?as_q=&num=10&btnG=Search+Scholar&as_epq=&as_oq=&as_eq=&as_occt=any&as_sauthors=%22Abdelmuttlib%20Ibrahim%20Abdalla%20Ahmed%22&as_publication=&as_ylo=&as_yhi=&as_allsubj=all&hl=en) Adnan Akhunzada [View author publications](/search?author=Adnan%20Akhunzada) Search author on: [PubMed](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=search&term=Adnan%20Akhunzada) [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.co.uk/scholar?as_q=&num=10&btnG=Search+Scholar&as_epq=&as_oq=&as_eq=&as_occt=any&as_sauthors=%22Adnan%20Akhunzada%22&as_publication=&as_ylo=&as_yhi=&as_allsubj=all&hl=en)

### Contributions

T. Kehkashan conceptualized the study, designed the methodology, and drafted the main manuscript. M. Abdelhaq and A. S. Al-Shamayleh contributed to the development of the predictive model and the interpretation of results. A. Akhunzada provided technical oversight, contributed to refining the manuscript, and supervised the overall research direction. A. I. A. A. Ahmed contributed to the literature review and data curation. R. Adil and M. Abdullah supported data preprocessing, experiment setup, and results visualization under supervision. All authors reviewed and approved the final version of the manuscript.

### Corresponding authors

Correspondence to [Raja Adil Riaz](mailto:rajaadilx1@gmail.com) or [Abdelmuttlib Ibrahim Abdalla Ahmed](mailto:abdelmuttlib@oiu.edu.sd) .

## Ethics declarations

### Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interests.

## Additional information

### Publisher’s note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

## Rights and permissions

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit [http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) .

[Reprints and permissions](https://s100.copyright.com/AppDispatchServlet?title=Sustainable%20and%20interpretable%20heart%20disease%20prediction%3A%20a%20clinical%20decision%20support%20approach%20for%20biomedical%20healthcare%20applications&author=Tanzila%20Kehkashan%20et%20al&contentID=10.1038%2Fs41598-026-37840-0&copyright=The%20Author%28s%29&publication=2045-2322&publicationDate=2026-02-04&publisherName=SpringerNature&orderBeanReset=true&oa=CC%20BY-NC-ND)

## About this article

[https://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1038/s41598-026-37840-0](https://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1038/s41598-026-37840-0) Cite this article Kehkashan, T., Abdelhaq, M., Al-Shamayleh, A.S. et al. Sustainable and interpretable heart disease prediction: a clinical decision support approach for biomedical healthcare applications. Sci Rep (2026). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-026-37840-0 [Download citation](https://citation-needed.springer.com/v2/references/10.1038/s41598-026-37840-0?format=refman&flavour=citation) Received : 28 July 2025 Accepted : 27 January 2026 Published : 04 February 2026 DOI : https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-026-37840-0 Share this article Anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content: Get shareable link Sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. Copy shareable link to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative Keywords [Convolutional neural network](/search?query=Convolutional%20neural%20network&facet-discipline="Science%2C%20Humanities%20and%20Social%20Sciences%2C%20multidisciplinary") [Heart disease prediction](/search?query=Heart%20disease%20prediction&facet-discipline="Science%2C%20Humanities%20and%20Social%20Sciences%2C%20multidisciplinary") [Medical diagnostics](/search?query=Medical%20diagnostics&facet-discipline="Science%2C%20Humanities%20and%20Social%20Sciences%2C%20multidisciplinary") [Decision support systems](/search?query=Decision%20support%20systems&facet-discipline="Science%2C%20Humanities%20and%20Social%20Sciences%2C%20multidisciplinary") [AI- driven decision-making](/search?query=AI-%20driven%20decision-making&facet-discipline="Science%2C%20Humanities%20and%20Social%20Sciences%2C%20multidisciplinary") [Healthcare analytics](/search?query=Healthcare%20analytics&facet-discipline="Science%2C%20Humanities%20and%20Social%20Sciences%2C%20multidisciplinary") [Biomedical healthcare applications](/search?query=Biomedical%20healthcare%20applications&facet-discipline="Science%2C%20Humanities%20and%20Social%20Sciences%2C%20multidisciplinary")
